
--- Page 1 ---
~ ~ ~ ~O4/0007/2003-05 REGIS~RED NO.D L-(N)O4/000/72 003~5
01m~
EX1RAORDINARY
'1rfTn - ~1
PARTn-Section 1
~ ~ ~ctlrI~lC1
PUBLISHEDB Y AUrnORffY
~ 48] "0{~{, ~, ~ 7, 2005, ~ 16,1 927
No. 48] NEW DEun, WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 2005 / BHADRA 16, 1927
~ ~ 1'ff 'Ii";~;f ~ ~ ~ t ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ 1'\f' §T;j~ff I
Separatep aging is given to this Part i!l order'that it may be filed as a separatec ompilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 7th Septembel2; 005/Bhadra1 6, 1927 (Saw)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the' President on
5th September2, 005 and is herebyp ublishedf or generali nformation:-
mE NAnONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENTG UARANTEEA CT, 2005
No.4 2O F2 005 ,
[5th Septembel;2 005.]
An Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households
in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of
guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household
whose adult members volunteer to do \.UlSkilledm anual work and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enactedb y Parliamentm the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India asf ollows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the NatioI)al Rural Employment GuaranteeA ct, 2005. Short title,
extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. commencement.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Governmentm ay, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates ~aybe appointed for different States
or for different areas in a State and any reference in. any such provision to the

--- Page 2 ---
2 nIB GAZETfE OF INDIA EXTRAORJ)INARY [PARTll-
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision in such State or, as the case may be, in such area:
Provided that this Act shall be applicable to the whole of the territory to which it
extends within a period of five years from the date of enactment of this Act.
Definitions. 2. In this Act, urnesst he context otherwise requires,-
(a) "adult" means a person who has completed his eighteenth years of age;
(b) "applicant" meanst he head of a household or any of its other adult members
who has applied for employment under the Scheme;
(c) "Block" meansa community development area within a district comprising
a group of Gram Panchayats;
(d) "Central Council" means the Central Employment Guarantee Council
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) "District ProgrammeC oordinator" meansa n officer of the State Government
designated as such under sub-section (1) of section 14 for implementation of the
.Scheme in a district;
(f) "household" means the members of a family related to each other by blood,
marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals or holding a
common ration card;
(g) "implementing agency" includes anydepartrnent of the Central Government
or a State' Government, a Zila Parishad, Panchayat at intermediate level, Gram
Panchayat or any local authority or Government undertaking or non-governmental
organisation authorised by the Central Government or the State Government- to
undertake the implementation of any work taken up under a Scheme;
(h) "minimum wage", in relation to any area, meanst he minimum wage fixed by
the State Government under section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for of 1948.
agricultural labourers as applicable in that area;
(i) "National Fund" means the National Employment Guarantee Fund
established under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(k) "preferred work" means any work which is taken up for implementation on
a priority basis under a Scheme; ,
(/) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) "Programme Officer" means an officer appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 15 for implementing the Scheme;
(n) "project" means any work taken up under a Scheme for the purpose of
providing employment to the applicants;
(0) "rural area" means any area in a State except those areas covered by any
urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under any law
for the time being in force;
(P) "Scheme" means a Scheme notified by the State Government under sub-
section (1) of section 4;
(q) "State Council" meanst he State Employment GuaranteeC ouncil constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(r) "unskille~ manual work" means any physical work which any adult person
is capable of doing without any skill or special training;
(s) "wager ate" meanst he wage rater eferred to in section6 .
11

--- Page 3 ---
SECI.J mE GAZETrE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
CHAPTERll
GUARANTEOEF E MPLOYMENINT R URALA REAS
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in Guaranteeo f
the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose rural
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of em
h
k.
fi
.
I
.
d
.
h h S h d d
h.
A to
hPloymouseh oent
lds.
suc wor m a mancia year m accor ance wit t e c erne ma e un er t IS ct.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be
entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursemento f daily wages shall be
made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which
such work was done.
(4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within .the limits of its
economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every adult
member of a household under a Scheme'for any period beyond the period guaranteedu nder
sub-section (1), as may be expedient.
CHAPTER ill
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE .SCHEMES AND UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE
4. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every State Employment
Guarantee
Government shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, by
Schemes for
notification, make a Scheme, for providing not less than one hundred days of guaranteed
rural areas.
employment in a financial year to every household in the rural areas covered under the
Scheme and whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work
subject to the conditions laid down by or under this Act and in the Scheme:
Provided that until any such Scheme is notified by the State Government, the Annual
Action Plan or Perspective Plan for the Sampoorna Grameen. Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) or
the National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) whichever is in force in the concerned
area immediately before such notification shall be deemed to be the action plan for the
Scheme for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made by it in at
least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language circulating in
the area or areas to which such Scheme shall apply.
(3) The Scheme made under sub-section (1) shall provide for the mini~m features
specified in Schedule I. I
5. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions specified in Conditions
for providing
Schedulell, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing guaranteed employment
guaranteed
under this Act.
employment.
(2) The persons employed under any Scheme made under this Act shall be entitled
to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in Schedule II.
11 of 1948. 6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Wager ~te.
Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this
Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such
notification shall not be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day.
(2) Until such time as a wage rate is fixed by the Central Government in respect of
any area in a State, the minimum wage fixed by the State Government under section 3 of
11 of 1948. the Minimum WagesA ct, I ?48 for agricultural laboUrers, shall be considered as the wage
rate applicable to that area.

--- Page 4 ---
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART 11-
Payment of 7. (1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such
unemployment employment within fifteen days of receipt of his applicatIon seeking employment or from
allowance. the date on which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance application,
whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance in accordance
with this section.
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by the
State Goverrirtlent and subject 10 the provisions of this Act and the Schemes and the
economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance payable under
sub-section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a household subject to the entitlement of
the household at such rate as may be specified by the State Government, by notification,
in consultation with the State Council:
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the wage rate for the first
thirty days during the fmancial year and not less than one-half of the wage rate for the
remaining period of the financial year.
(3) The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to a
household during any financial year shall cease as soon as-
(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram Panchayat or the Programme Officer
.toreport for work either by himself or depute at least one adult member of his
household; or
(b) the period for which employment is sought comes to an end and no member
of the household of the applicant had turned up for employment; or
(c) the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in total
at least one hundred. days of work within the financial year; or
(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages and
unemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for one hundred
days of work during the financial year.
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to, the household of an applicant jointly
shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local authority
(including the Panchayats at the district, intermediate or village level) as the State
Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf.
(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (1) shall be made
or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due for payment.
(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for payment tfunemployment
allowance under this Act.
Non- 8. (1) If the Programme Officer is not in a position to disburse the unemployment
disbursement allowance in time or at all for any reason beyond his control, he shall report the matter to
of the District Programme Coordinator and announce such reasons in a notice to be displayed
~~~:~~~~~:nt on his notice board and the notice board of the Gram Panchayat and such other
certain conspicuous places as he may deem necessary.
circumstances.
(2) Every case of non-payment or delayed payment of unemployment allowance shall
be reported in the annual report submitted by the District Programme Coordinator to the
State Government along with the reasons for such non-payment or delayed payment.
(3) The State Government shall take all measures to make the payment of
unemployment allowance reported under sub-section (1) to the concerned household as
expeditiously as possible.
Disentitlement 9. An applicant whO'-
to receive
unemployment (a) does not acceptt he employment provided to his household under a Scheme;
allowance in or
certain
circumstances.

--- Page 5 ---
SEC.l] mE GAZEnE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
(b) does not report for work within fifteen days of being notified by the
ProgrammeO fficer or the implementinga gencyto report for the work; or
(c) continuouslyr emains absentf rom work, without obtaining a permission
from the concernedi mplementinga gencyf or a period of more than one week or
remainsa bsentf or a total period of more than one week in any month,
shall not be eligible to claim the unemploymenat llowancep ayableu ndert his Act for a
period of three monthsb ut shallb e eligible to seeke mploymenut ndert he Schemea t any
time.
CHAPTERN
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING AUTHORrrIES
10. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification Central
specify, there shall be constituted a Council to be called the Central Emplo~ent Guarantee Employment
Council to discharge the functions, and perform the duties, assigned to it by or under this Guarantee
Council.
Act.
(2) The headquarters of the Central Council shall be at Delhi.
(3) The Central Council shall consist of the following members to be appointed by
the Central Government, namely:-
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) not more than such number of representatives of the Central Ministries
including the Planning Commission not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India as may be determined by the Central Government;
(c) not more than such number of representatives of the State Governments as
may be determined by the Central Government;
(d) not more than fifteen non-official members representing Panchayati Raj
Institutions, organisations of workers and disadvantaged groups:
Provided that such non-official members shall include two chairpersons of
District Panchayatsn ominated by the Central Government by rotation for a period
of one year at a time: ,
Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members
nominated under this clause shall be women:
Provided also that not less than one-third of the non-official me~bers shall be
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Oth~r Backward
Classes and Minorities;
(e) such number of representatives of the States as the Central Government
may, by rules, determine in this behalf;
(f) a Member-Secretaryn ot below the rank of Joint Secretaryt o the Government
.
of India.
(4) The tenDSa nd conditions subject to which .the Chairperson and other members
of the Central Council may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) of the Central Council shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
11. (1) The Central Council shall perfonn and discharge the following functions and Functions and
duties of
duties, namely:-
Central
(a) establish a central evaluation and monitoring system; Council.
(b) advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the implementation
of this Act;

--- Page 6 ---
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PARTll-
(c) review the monitoring and redressal mechanism from time to time and
recommend improvements required;
(d) promote the widest possible dissemination of information about the
Schemes made under this Act;
(e) monitoring the irnplementationofthis Act;
(t) preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the Central
Government on the implementation of this Act;
(g) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Council shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the various
Schemesm ade under this Act and for that purpose collect or causet o be collected statistics
pertaining to the rural economy and the implementation of the Schemes.
State 12. (1) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the implementation of
Employment this Act at the State level, every State Government shall constitute a State Council to be
Guarantee
known as the (name of the State) State Employment Guarantee Council with a
Council.
Chairperson and such number of official members as may be determined by the State
Government and not. more than fifteen non-official me~bers nominated by the State
Government from Panchayati Raj institutions, organisations of workers and disadvantaged
groups:
Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated under
this clause shall be women:
Provided further that not less than one third of the non-official members shall be
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes
and Minorities.
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of the
StateC ouncil may be appointed and the time, place and procedure of the meetings (including
the quorum at such meetings) of the State Council shall be such as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
(3) The duties and functionso f the StateC ouncil shall include-
(a) advisingt he StateG overnmenot n all mattersc oncerningt he Schemea nd
p' lementationin the State; .
its im ,
(b) determiningth e preferredw orks;
(c) reviewingt he monitoringa nd redressaml echanismfsr om time to time and
recommendingim provements;
(d) promotingt he widestp ossibled isseminationo f informationa boutt his Act
and the Schemesu nderi t;
(e) monitoring the implementationo f this Act and the Schemesin the State
and coordinatings uchi mplementationw ith the CentralC ouncil;
(f) preparingt he annualr eport to be laid before the StateL egislatureb y the
StateG overnment;
(g) any other duty or function asm ayb e assignedto it by the CentralC ouncil
or the StateG overnment.
(3) The StateC ouncil shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the Schemes
operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected statistics
pertaining to the rural economy and the implementation of the Schemesa nd Programmes
in the State. .

--- Page 7 ---
SEC1. ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
13. (1) The Panchayatsa t district, intermediate and village levels shall be the principal Principal
authorities for planning and implementation of the Schemes made under this Act. authorities for
planning and
(2) The functions of the Panchayatsa t the district level shall be~
implementation
of Schemes.
(a) to finalise and approve blockwise shelf of projects to be taken up under a
programme under the Scheme;
(b) to supervisea nd monitor the projects taken up at the Block level and district
level; and
(c) to carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Council, from time to time.
(3) The functions of the Panchayat at intermediate level shall be-
(a) to approve the Block level Plan for forwarding it to the district Panchayat
at the district level for final approval;
(b) to supervise and monitor the projects taken up at the Gram Panchayata nd
Block level; and
(c) to carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Council, from time to time.
,
(4) The District Programme Coordinator shall assistt he Panchayata t the district level
in discharging its functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder.
14. (1) The Chief Executive Officer of the District Panchayato r the Collector of the District
district or any other district level officer of appropriate rank as the State Government may Programme
Coordinator.
decide shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator for the implementation
of the Schem~ in the district.
(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the implementation
of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder.
(3) The functions of the District Programme Coordinator shall be-
(a) to assist the district panchayat in discharging its functions under this Act
and any scheme made thereunder;
(b) to consolidate the plans prepared by the Blocks and project proposals
received from other implementing agencies for inclusion in the shelf of projects to
be approved by the Panchayat at district level;
(c) to accord necessary sanction and administrative clearanc~ wherever
necessary;
(d) to coordinate with the ProgrammeO fficers functioning within his jurisdiction
and the implementing agenciest o ensure that the applicants are provided employment
as per their entitlements under this Act;
(e) to review, monitor and superviset he performance of the ProgrammeO fficers;
(f) to conduct periodic inspection of the works in progress; and
(g) to redress th~ grievances of the applicants.
(4) The State Government shall delegate such administrative and financial powers to
the District Programme Coordinator as may be required to enable him to carry out his
functions under this Act.
(5) The Programme Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 15 and all
other officers of the State Government and local authorities and bodies functioning within
the district shall be responsible to assist the District Programme Coordinator in carrying
out his functions under this Act and the Schemes made thereunder.
(6) The District Programme Coordinator shall prepare in the month of Decembere very
year a labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of anticipated demand

--- Page 8 ---
8 mE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART1 1-
for unskilled manual work in the district and the plan for engagemento f labourers in the
works covered under the Scheme and submit it to the district panchayat.
Programme 15. (1) At every Panchayat at intermediate level, the State Government shall appoint
Officer. a person who is not below the rank of Block Development Officer with such qualifications
and experience as may be determined by the State Government as Programme Officer at
the Panchayat at intermediate level. .
(2) The Programme Officer shall assist the Panchayat at intermediate level in
discharging its functions under this Act and any Scheme made thereunder.
(3) The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for
employment with the employment opportunities arising from projects in the area under his
jurisdiction.
(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan for the Block under his jurisdiction
by consolidating the project proposals prepared by the Gram Panchayatsa nd the proposals
received from intermediate panchayats.
(5) The functions of the Programme Officer shall include-
(a) monitoring of projects taken up by the Gram Panchayats and other
implementing agencies-within the Block;
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of-unemployment allowance to the
.eligible households;
(c) ensuring prompt and fair paymento f wages to all labourers employed under
a programme of the Scheme within the Block;
(d) ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction of the
Gram Panchayat are carried out by the Gram Sabha and that prompt action is taken
on the objections raised in the social audit;
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints that may arise in connection with the
implementation of the Scheme within the Block; and
(f) any pther work as may be assigned to him by the District Programme
Coordinator or the State Government.
(6) The Programme Officers shalJ function under the direction, control and
superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator.
(7) The State Government may, by order, direct that all or any of'he functions of a
Programme Officer shall be discharged by the Gram Panchayat or a local authority.
Responsibilities 16. (1) The Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for identification of the
of the Gram projects in the Gram Panchayat area to be taken up under a Scheme as per the
Panchayats. recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas and for executing and
supervising such works.
(2) A Gram Panchayatm ay take up any project under a Scheme within the area of the
Gram Panchayata s may be sanctioned by the Programme Officer.
(3) Every Gram Panchayats hall, after considering the recornmendationso f the Gram
Sabha and the Ward Sabhas,p repare a development plan and maintain a shelf of possible
works to be taken up under the Scheme as and when demand for work arises.
(4) The Gram Panchayat shall forward its proposals for the development projects
including the order of priority betWeend ifferent works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny
and preliminary apprbval prior to the commencemento f the year in which it is proposed to
be executed.
(5) The Programme Officer shall allot at least fifty per cent. of the works in terms of
its cost under a Scheme to be implemented through the. Gram Panchayats.

--- Page 9 ---
SEC1. ] THE GAZETfE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
(6) The Programme Officer shall supply each Gram Panchayatw ith-
(a) the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it; and
(b) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the residents of
the Gram Panchayat.
(7) The Gram Panchayats hall allocate employmento pportunities among the applicants
and ask them to report for work.
(8) The works taken up by a Gram Panchayatu nder a Scheme shall meet the required
technical standards and measurements. '
17, (1) The 'Gram Sabha shall monitor the execution of works within the Gram Sociala udit of
Panchayat. work by Gram
()2 T he Gram Sabha sh all conduct regular soc.i.aSl aabuhdait.s of all the projects under the
Scheme taken up within the Gram Panchayat.
(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make available all relevant documents including the
muster rolls, bills, vouchers, measurement books, copies of sanction orders and other
connected books of account and papers to the Gram Sabha for the purpose of conducting
the social audit.
18, The State Government shall make available to the District Programme Coordinator Responsibilities
and the Programme Officers necessary staff and technical support as may be necessary of State .
for the effective implementation of the Scheme. ?ovemme~tI n
Implementing
Scheme.
19, The State Government shall, by rules, determine appropriate grievance redressal Grievance
mechanisms at the Block level and the district level for dealing with any complaint by any redressa~
person in respect of implementation of the Schemea nd lay down the procedure for disposal mechanism.
of such complaints.
CHAPTERV
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL AND STATE EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE FUNDS AND AUDIT
20. (1) The CentralG overnmenst hall, by notification, establisha 'fund to be called National
the National EmploymentG uaranteeF und for the purposeso f this Act. Employment
GuaranteeF und,
(2) The CentralG overnmenmt ay,a fterd ue appropri~tionm adeb y P'fliament by law
in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of money/as the Central
Governmenmt ay considern ecessaryto the NationalF und.
(3) The amounts tandingt o the credit of the NationalF und shallb e utilised in such
mannera nd subjectt o suchc onditionsa nd limitations asm ayb e prescribedb y the Central
Government.
21. (1) The StateG overnmenmt ay, by notification,e stablisha fund to be called the State
State Employment Guarantee Fund for the purposes of implementation of the Scheme. Employment
Guarantee Fund.
(2) The amount standing to the credit of the State Fund shall be expended in such
manner and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by the State
Government for the purposes of implementation of this Act and the Schemes made ."
thereunder and for meeting the administrative expenses in connection with the
implementation of this Act.
(3) The State Fund shall be held and administered on behalf of the State Government
in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed by the State Government.
22. (1) Subject to the rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, Funding
the Central Government shall meet the cost of the followi.ng, namely:- pattern.
(a) the amount required for payment of wages for unskilled manual work under
the Scheme;

--- Page 10 ---
10 nIB GAZEliE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART1 1-
(b) up to three-fourths of the material cost of the Schemei ncluding payment of
wages to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II;
(c) such percentage of the total cost of the Scheme as may be determined by
the Central Government towards the administrative expenses,w hich may include the
salary and allowances of the Programme Officers and his supporting staff, the
administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities to be provided under
Schedule II and such other item as may be decided by the Central Government.
(2) The State Government shall meet the cost of the following, namely:-
(a) the cost of unemployment allowance payable under the Scheme;
(b) one-fourth of the material cost of the Scheme including payment of wages
to skilled and semi-skilled workers subject to the provisions of Schedule II;
(c) the administrative expenseso f the State Council.
23. (1) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the
Transparency
and District shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and managemento f the funds placed
accountabilitY. at their disposal for the purpose ,of implementing a Scheme.
(2) The State Government may prescribe the manner of maintaining proper books
and accountso f employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with
the implementation of the provisions of this Act and the Schemesm ade thereunder.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, determine the arrangementst o be made for
the proper execution of ScheI1,1easn d programmes under the Schemes and to ensure
transparency and accountability at all levels in the implementation of the Schemes.
(4) All payments of wages in cash and unemployment allowances shall be I1,1ade
directly to ,the person concerned and in the presence of independent persons of the
community on pre-announced dates.
(5) If any dispute or complaint arisesc oncerning the implementation of a Scheme by
the Gram Panchayat,t he matter shall be referred to ~e Programme Officer.
(6) The Programme Officer shall enter every complaint in a complaint register
maintained by him and shall dispose of the disputes and complaints within seven days of
its receipt and in case it relates to a matter to be resolved by any other authority it shall be
forwarded to such authority under intimation to the complainant.
Audit of 24. (1) The Central Government may, in consultationw ith the Comptroller and Auditor
accounts. General of India, prescribe appropriate arrangements for audits of !fie accounts of the
Schemes at all levels.
(2) The accounts of the Scheme shall be maintained in such form and in suchm anner
as may be prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
~
25. Whoeverc ontravenesth e provisionso f this Act shall on convictionb e liable to
Penalty
for non- a fme which may extendt o one thousandr upees.
cotIlpliance.
Power to 26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable
delegate. by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances and subject to such
conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State Government or such officer
subordinate to the Central Government or the State Government as it may specify in suchnotification.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers exercisable by
it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes)m ay, in such circumstancesa nd subject
tt> such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also,b y such officer subordinate to it as
it may specify in such notification.

--- Page 11 ---
SEC.I J mE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11
27. (1) The Central Government may give such directions as it may considern ecessary Power of
to the State Government for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. Central
Government
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government to give
may, on receipt of any complaint regarding the issue or improper utilisation of funds granted directions.
under this Act in respect of any Scheme if prima facie satisfied that there is a case, cause
an investigation into the complaint made by any agency designated by it and if necessary,
order stoppageo f releaseo ffunds to the Schemea nd institute appropriate remedial measures
for its proper implementation within a reasonable period of time.
28. The provisions of this Act or the Schemes made thereunder shall have effect Act to have
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time overriding
effect.
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law:
Provided that where a State enactment exists or is enacted to provide employment
guarantee for unskilled manual work to rural households consistent with the provisions of
this Act under which the entitlement of the households is not less than and the conditions
of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed under this Act, the State Government
shall have the option of implementing its own enactment:
Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to the
concerned State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central
Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been entitled to receive
under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be implemented.
29. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessaryo r expedient so to Power to
do, it may, by notification, amend Schedule I or Schedule II and thereupon Schedule I or amend
Schedules.
Schedule II, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.
30. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District Protection of
Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is deemed action taken
in good faith.
45 of 1860. to be, a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal'Code in respect
of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules
or Schemesm ade thereunder.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition of Powero f
previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. Central
Government
(2) In particular, and without the prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may to make
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- t rules.
(a) the number of representatives of the State Governments under clause (e)
of sub-section (3) of section 10;
(b) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairman and other members
of the Central Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Central Council, under
sub-section (4) of section 10;
(c) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject tb which
the National Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (3) of section 20;
(d) the rules relating to funding pattern to meet the cost of certain items under
sub-section (1) of section 22;
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
32. (1) The State Government may, by notification, and subject tb the condition of Power of
previous publication, and consistent with this Act and the rules made by the Central State
Government
Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
to make
rules.

--- Page 12 ---
12 mE GAZEm OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PARlTl-
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
{a) the terms and conditions upon which eligibility for unemploymenta llowance
may be determined under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section
(6) of section 7;
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and members of
the State Council may be appointed, and the time, place and procedure of the
meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of their appointment to the State
Council, under sub-section (2) of section 12;
(d) the grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level
and the procedure to be followed in such matter under section 19;
(e) the manner in which and the conditions and limitations subject to which
the State Fund shall be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(f) the authority who may administer and the manner in which he may hold the
State Fund under sub-section (3) of section 21;
(g) the manner of maintaining books of account of employment of labourers
and the expenditure under sub-section (2) of section 23;
(h) the arrangements required for proper execution of Schemes under sub-
section (3)'ofsection 23;
(I) the form and ~anner in which the accountso f the Scheme shall be maintained
under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in. respect of
which pr~vision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
Laying of 33. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
rules and soon as may be after it is made, before eachH ouse of Parliament, while it is in session, for
Schemes.
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
sessiono r the successives essionsa foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modificatioQ
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, ~e rule shall have
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, aslthe case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall, as
soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature where
there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the Sta~ Legislature, before that
House.
Powert o 34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
remove
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
difficulties.
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.

--- Page 13 ---
SECI.] 11IE GAZETrE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
SCHEDULE I
[See section 4(3)]
MINIMUM FEATURES OF A RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME
1. The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works in their order ofpriority:-
(i) water conservation and water harvesting;
(ii) drought proofing (including afforestation and tree plantation);
(iii) irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
(iv) provision of irrigation facility to land owned by households belonging to
the Scheduled Castesa nd ScheduledT ribes or to land of beneficiaries of land refonns
or that of the beneficiaries under the IndiraAwas Yojana of the Government of India;
(v) renovation of traditional water bodies including desilting of tanks;
(vi) land development;
(vii) flood control and protection works including drainage in water logged areas;
(viii) rural connectivity to provide all-weather access;a nd
(ix) any other work which may be notified by ~e Central Government in
consultation with the State Government.
2. Creation of durable assetsa nd strengthening the livelihood resource base of the
rural poor shall be an important objective of the Scheme.
3. The works taken up under the scheme shall be in rural areas.
4. The StateC ouncil shall prepare a list of preferred works for different areasb ased on
their ability to create durable assets.
5. The Scheme shall be subject to appropriate arrangements as may be laid down by
the State Government under the rules issued by it for proper maintenance of the public
assets created under the Scheme.
6. Under no circumstances shall the labourers be paid less than the wage rate.
7. When wages are directly linked with the quantity of work, the wages shall be paid
according to the schedule of rates fIXed by the State Government for different types of work
every year, in consultation with the State Council.
8. The schedule of rates of wages for unskilled labourers shall be so fIX,d that a person
working for sevenh ours would nonnally earn a wage equal to the wage rate}
9. The cost of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled and
semi-skilled workers taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed forty per cent. of the total
project costs.
10. It shall be opent o the Programme Officer and Gram Panchayatt o direct any person
who applied for employment under the Schemet o do work of any type pennissible under it.
11. The Scheme shall not pennit engaging any contractor for implementation of the
projects under it.
12. As far as practicable, a task funded under the Scheme shall be perfonned by using
manual labour and not machines.
13. Every Scheme shall contain adequate provisions for ensuring transparency and
accountability at all level of implementation.
14. Provisions for regular inspectiona nd supervisiono f works taken up undert he Scheme
shall be madet o ensurep roper quality of work as well ast o ensure that the total wagesp aid for
the completion of the work is commensuratew ith the quality and quantity of work done.
13

--- Page 14 ---
14 nrn GAZETfE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART1 1-
15. The District ProgrammeC oordinator,t heProgratmne Officer andt he GramPanchayat
implementing the Scheme shall prepare annually a report containing the facts and figures
and achievementsr elating to the implementation of the Scheme within his or its jurisdiction
and a copy of the same shall be made available to the public on demand and on payment of
such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
16. All accountsa nd records relating to the Scheme shall be made available for public
scrutiny and any person desirous of obtaining a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be
provided such copies or extracts on demand and after paying suchf ee as may be specified in
the Scheme.
17. A copy of the musterr olls of eachS chemeo r project under a Scheme shall be made
available in the offices of the Gram Panchayata nd the Programme Officer for inspection by
any person interested after paying such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
SCHEDULE II
(See section 5)
CONDI'fIONSF OR GUARANTEEDR URALE MPLOYMENTU NDERA SCHEMEA ND MINIMUM
ENTITLEMENTSO F LABOURERS
1. The adult members of every household who-
(I) reside in any rural areas; and
(ii) are willing to do unskilled manual work,
may submit their names, age and the address of the household to the Gram Panchayat at the
village level (hereafter in this Schedule referred to as the Gram Panchayat) in the jurisdiction
of which they reside for registration of their household for issuance of a job card.
2. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register the household, after making
such enquiry as it deems fit and issue a job card containing such details of adult members of
the household affIXing their photographs, as may be specified by the State Government in
the Scheme.
3. The registration made under paragraph 2 shall be for such period as may be laid in
the Scheme, but in any case not less than five years, and may be renewed from time to time.
4. Every adult member of a registered household whose name appears in the job card
shall be entitled to apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme.
5. All registered persons belonging to a household shall be entitle~to employment in
accordance with the Scheme made under the provisions of this Act, for ashlany days as each
applicant may request, subject to a maximum of one hundred days per household in a given
financial year.
6. The Programme Officer shall ensure that every applicant referred to in paragraph 5
shall be provided unskilled manual work in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme
within fifteen days of receipt of an application or from the date he seeks work in case of
advance application, whichever is later:
Provided that priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work under this Act.
7. Applications for work must be for at least fourteen days of continuous work.
8. There shall be no limit Qnt he number of days of employment for which a person may
apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to him subject to the
aggregate entitlement of the household.
9. Applications for work may be submitted in writing either to the Gram Panchayat or to
the Programme Officer, as may be specified in the Scheme.
10. The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer, as the case may be, shall be bound to
accept valid applications and to issue a dated receipt to. the applicant. Group applications
may also be submitted.

--- Page 15 ---
SEc.l] nIB GAZETfE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
11. Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated in writing, by mea!lS
of a letter sentt o him at the address given in the job card and by a public notice displayed at
the office of the Panchayatsa t the district, intermediate or village level.
12. As far as possible, employment shall be provided within a radius offive kilometres
of the village where the applicant resides at the time of applying.
13. A new work under the Scheme shall be commenced bnly if-
(0) at least fifty labourers become available for such work; and
(b) the labourers cannot be absorbed in the ongoing works:
Provided that this condition shall not be applicable for new works, as determined by
the State Government, in hilly areasa nd in respect of aforestation. .
14. In cases the employment is provided outside such radius, it must be provided
within the Block, and the labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages
to meet additional transportation and living expenses.
15. A period of ~mployment shall ordinarily be at least fourteen days continuously
with not'more than six days in a week.
16. In all casesw here unemploymenta llowance is paid, or due to be paid,t he Programme
Officer shall inform the District Programme Coordinator in writing the reasonsw hy it was not
possible for him to provide employment or causet o provide employment to the applicants.
17. The District ProgrammeC oordinator shall, in his Annual Reportt o the StateC ouncil,
explain ast o why employmentc ould not be provided in casesw here paymento funemployment
allowance is involved.
18. Provision shall be made in the Schemef or advancea pplications, that is, applications
which may be submitted in advance of the date from which employment is sought.
19. Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple applications by
the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which employment is sought
do not overlap.
20. The Gram panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and
maintained such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner
as may be specified in the Schemec ontaining particulars of job cards and passbooks issued,
name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult members of the household
registered with the Gram Panchayat. t
21. The Gram Panchayat shall send such list or lists of the names and addresseso f
households and their adult members registered with it and supply such other information to
the concernedP rogramme Officer at suchp eriods and in such form as may be specified in the
Scheme.
22. A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the notice
board of the Gram Panchayata nd at the office of the Programme Officer and at such other
p lacesa s the Programme Officer may deemn ecessarya nd the list shall be open for inspection
by the State Government and any personi nterested.
23. If the Gram panchayat is satisfied at any time that a person has registered with it by
furnishing false information, it may direct the Programme Officer to direct his name to be
struck offfrom the register and direct the applicant to return the job card:
Provided that no such action under this paragraph shall be directed unlesst he applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the presence of two independentp ersons.
24. If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under the Scheme by
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shall be entitled to, free of
charge, such medical treatment as is admissible under the Sr.heme.

--- Page 16 ---
16 mE GAZE1TE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PARITI- SEC. 1]
25. Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary,t he State Government
shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation, treatment, medicines and
payment of daily allowance not less than half of the wage rate required to be paid had the
injured been engaged in the work.
26. If a person employed under a Scheme dies or becomes permanently disabled by
accident arising out of and in the course of employment,h e shall be paid by the implementing
agency an ex gratia payment at the rate of twenty-five thousand rupees or such amount as
may be notified by the Central Government,a nd the amount shall be paid to the legal heirs of
the deceased or the disabled, as the case may be.
27. The facilities of safe drinking water,s hade for children and periods of rest, first-aid
box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and other health
hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at the work site.
28. In caset he number of children below the age of six years accompanyingt he women
working at any site are five or more, provisions shall be made to depute one of such women
worker to look after such children.
29. The person deputed under paragraph 28 shall be paid wage rate.
30. In caset he payment of wages is not made within the period specified under the
Scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive paYn;tento f compensation as per the
provisions of the Paymento f WagesA ct, 1936 (4 of 1936).
31. The wages under a Schemem ay be paid either wholly in casho r in casha nd kind
provided that at least one-fourth of the wages shall be paid in cash only.
32. The State Government may prescribe that a portion of the wages in cash may be
paid to the labourers on a daily basis during the period of employment.
33. If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying any person
who is employed under a Scheme, such person shall be entitled to, free of charge, such
medical treatment for the child as may be specified in the Scheme and in case of death or
disabl ement, through an ex gratia payment as may be determined by the State Government.
34. In case of every employment under the Scheme,t here shall be no discrimination
solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976
(25 of 1976), shall be complied with.
B.A.AGRAWAL,
Add/. Secretaryt o the Govt. ofI ndia.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2005.
MG I PMRND-2984GI(S3)-07 -09-2005.
~

--- Page 75 ---
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
vlk/kj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II—[k.M 3—mi&[k.M (ii)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii)
izkf/dkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
la- 1565] ubZ fnYyh] c`Lifrokj] twu 23] 2016@vk"kk<+ 2] 1938
No. 1565] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2016/ASHADHA 2, 1938
(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)ााााममममीीीीणणणण ििििववववककककाााासससस मममम(cid:12)(cid:12)ंं(cid:12)(cid:12)ंं ााााललललयययय
अअअअििििधधधधससससचचूूचचूू ननननाााा
नई (cid:4)द(cid:6)ल ी, 22 जून, 2016
ककककाााा....आआआआ.... 2222111188882222((((अअअअ))))....————के(cid:11)(cid:12)ीय सरकार, महा(cid:17)म ा गांधी रा(cid:22)(cid:23) ीय (cid:24)ामीण रोजगार गारंटी अिधिनयम,
2005 (2005 का 42), (िजसे इसम! इसके प#ात् उ'त अिधिनयम कहा गया ह)ै , क( धारा 29 क( उप-धारा
(1) )ारा *द(cid:17)त शि'त य, का उपयोग करत े -ए, के(cid:11)(cid:12)ीय सरकार का यह समाधान होने पर (cid:4)क ऐसा करना
आव2य क और समीचीन ह,ै उ3 अिधिनयम क( अनुसूची-1 का िन7न िलिखत और सशं ोधन करती ह,ै अथा9त ्
उ'त अिधिनयम क( अनसु ूची-1 म!, पैरा 20 के :थान पर, िन7न िलिखत रखा जाएगा, अथा9त:् -
(20) “(cid:24)ाम पंचायत और अ(cid:11)य काया9(cid:11)व यन अिभकरण, )ारा :क(म के अधीन (cid:4)कए गए सभी काय9 के िलए
मौिलक घटक क( लागत िजसके अंतग9त कुशल और अधक9 ुशल कम9कार, के पा=र>िमक भी ह,ै िजला
:तर पर चालीस *ितशत से अिधक नह@ होगी ।”
I
[फा. स.ं ज-े 11011/02/2016-मनरेगा (आर.ई. )]
अपरािजता सारंगी, संयु'त सिचव
(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:15)टटटटपपपप(cid:18)(cid:18)(cid:18)(cid:18)णणणण
:::: महा(cid:17)म ा गांधी रा(cid:22)(cid:23) ीय (cid:24)ामीण रोजगार गारंटी अिधिनयम, 2005 (2005 का 42) क( अनुसचू ी म!
सं. का.आ. 323(अ.) तारीख )ारा पहला संशोधन (cid:4)कया गया था और त(cid:17)प#ात िनAिलिखत संCयांको )ारा
संशोधन (cid:4)कए गए :-
1. का.आ. 88(अ) तारीख 14.01.2008
3143 GI/2016 (1)

--- Page 76 ---
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)]
2. का.आ. 1489(अ) तारीख 18.06.2008
3. का.आ. 3000(अ) तारीख 31.12.2008
4. का.आ. 1824(अ) तारीख 22.07.2009
5. का.आ. 1860(अ) तारीख 30.07.2009
6. का.आ. 1484(अ) तारीख 30.06.2011
7. का.आ. 2202(अ) तारीख 22.09.2011
8. का.आ. 2423(अ) तारीख 21.10.2011
9. का.आ. 1022(अ) तारीख 04.05.2011
10.का.आ. 2754(अ) तारीख 21.11.2012
11.का.आ. 164(अ) तारीख 14.01.2013
12.का.आ. 867(अ) तारीख 01.04.2013
13.का.आ. 1770(अ) तारीख 20.06.2013
14.का.आ. 3423(अ) तारीख 11.11.2013
15.का.आ. 19(अ) तारीख 03.01.2014
16.का.आ. 1888(अ) तारीख 21.07.2014
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 22nd June, 2016
S.O. 2182(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 29 of
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (42 of 2005)
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act), the Central Government, being satisfied that it is
necessary and expedient so to do, hereby makes the following further amendments in Schedule I
to the said Act, namely:—
In the said Act, in Schedule I, for paragraph 20, the following paragraph shall be
substituted, namely:-
(20) “For all works taken up under the Scheme, by the Gram Panchayat and other
implementing agencies, the cost of the material component including the wages of the
skilled and semi-skilled workers, shall not exceed forty percent at the district level.”
[F. No. J-11011/02/2016-MGNREGA (RE-I)]
APARAJITA SARANGI, Jt. Secy.
Note: Schedule I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
(42 of 2005) was first amended vide number S.O. 323(E), dated 6th March, 2007 and
subsequently amended vide following numbers:-
1. S.O. 88(E), dated the 14th January, 2008
2. S.O. 1489(E), dated the 18th June, 2008

--- Page 77 ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(ii)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 3
3. S.O. 3000(E), dated the 31st December, 2008
4. S.O. 1824(E), dated the 22nd July, 2009
5. S.O. 1860(E), dated the 30th July, 2009
6. S.O. 1484(E), dated the 30th June, 2011
7. S.O. 2202(E), dated the 22nd September, 2011
8. S.O. 2423(E), dated the 21st October, 2011
9. S.O. 1022(E), dated the 4th May, 2011
10. S.O. 2754(E), dated the 21st November, 2012
11. S.O. 164(E), dated the 14th January, 2013
12. S.O. 867(E), dated the 1st April, 2013
13. S.O. 1770(E), dated the 20th June, 2013
14. S.O. 3423(E), dated the 11th November, 2013
15. S.O. 19(E), dated the 3rd January, 2014
16. S.O. 1888(E), dated the 21st July, 2014
Uploaded by the Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
