
--- Page 1 ---
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(PMFBY)
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
2023
Effective from Kharif 2023
`
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare\
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Government of India
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
INDEX
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023

--- Page 2 ---
Sl. No. Section Page No.
1 Objective of the Scheme 11
2 Adoption of Technology for Scheme Administration 11-14
3 Coverage of Farmers 14-16
4 Coverage of Crops 16
5 Coverage of Risks & Exclusions 17-23
6 Preconditions for Implementation of the Scheme 23-28
7 Tendering and Notification 29-42
Engagement of Common Service Centers (CSCs) and Other
8 42-44
Intermediaries for Coverage of Non-Loanee Farmers
9 Electronic Remittance of Funds 39-40
10 Census Code Mapping of Entities 44-46
11 Digitization of Land Records 47
12 Sum Insured/Coverage Limit 47
13 Premium Rates and Premium Subsidy 47-50
14 Budget for Administrative Expenses 50
Central Program Management Unit (CPMU) & State Program
15 50-51
Management Unit (SPMU)
16 Seasonality Discipline 51-59
17 Collection of Applications and Premium from Farmers 59-69
18 Assessment of Loss/Shortfall in Yield 69-75
19 Dispute Resolution Regarding Yield Data/Crop Loss Data 75-81
20 Use of Innovative Technologies in Yield Estimation 82-88
21 Assessment of Claims & Claim Settlement 88-121
Participation of Loss Assessors/Evaluators for Loss Assessment
22 121-122
under the Scheme
23 Procedure for Settlement of Claims to the Farmers 122-125
24 Important Conditions/Clauses Applicable for Coverage of Risks 125-126
25 Acreage Discrepancy 126-128
26 Information Education and Communication (IEC) Capacity Building 128-131
27 Service Charges 131-133
28 Goods & Service Tax (GST) 133
29 Monitoring and Review of the Scheme 133-134
30 Grievance Redressal Mechanism 134-138
31 Empanelment and Selection of Insurance Companies (ICs) 138-140
32 Clustering/Clubbing of Districts for Bidding by the State/UT 140-141
Assessment of Performance and De-empanelment of Insurance
33 142
Companies
34 Evaluation of Efficiency of Nodal Department of the State/UT 142-143
35 Evaluation and Efficiency of Districts 142
36 Evaluation and Efficiency of Banks 143
37 Evaluation and Efficiency of CSC-VLEs 143
38 Role & Responsibilities of Various Agencies 143-157
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023

--- Page 3 ---
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) for Administration of Crop
39 157-167
Insurance Program under PMFBY
Add-on Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by Wild
Annexure-I 168-173
Animals
Format for Reporting of Excess Area Insured / Acreage
Discrepancy for Consideration of Application of Area
Annexure-II 174-175
Correction Factor by Insurance Company for all Insurance
Units
Illustration for Classification of Risks, Clubbing / Clustering
Annexure-III 176--181
of Risks and Districts and Determination of L1 Bidder
Check-list for STAC while disposing off yield disputes under
Annexure-IV 182-185
PMFBY and for Referring Case to Central TAC
Illustration of Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of
Annexure-V 186-210
similar or different Perils under PMFBY
Annexure-VI Sample template of Opt-out form for loanee farmer 211-212
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023

--- Page 4 ---
TABLE INDEX
Table No. Topic Para. No.
Table 1 Premium Rate Payable by the Farmer 13.1
Table 2 Seasonality Discipline 16.4
Table 3 Calculation of Crop-wise Sum Insured 17.6.6
Table 4 Number of CCEs to be Conducted at IU Level 18.3
Table 5 Yield Calculation for Multi-Picking Crops 18.5.13.3
Types of Resolution to be used for Vegetation Index derivation
Table 6 for Different Levels of Analysis 19.7.5
Table 7 Calculation of Threshold Yield 21.2.1
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for Payment of Prevented /
Table 8 21.3.5.11
Failed Sowing and Prevented Planting / Germination Claims
Detailed Procedure for On Account Payment of Claims due to
Table 9 21.4.6.6
Mid-Season Adversity
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of localized
Table 10 21.5.10
claims
Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Post-
Table 11 21.6.11
Harvest Losses
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 5 ---
ABBREVIATIONS
A/C Account
AC Appellate Committee
ACF Area Correction Factor
AEPS Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
AIC Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited
AI&ML Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
AIDE App for Intermediary Enrollment
API Application Programming Interface
APR Actuarial Premium Rate
ARG Automatic Rain Gauge
ARTM Alternate Risk Transfer Model
AU Administrative Unit
AWiFS Advanced Wide Field Sensor
AWS Automatic Weather Stations
AY Actual Yield
BC Banking Correspondent
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General
CB Commercial Banks
CBS Core Banking Solution
CCAFS Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
Security
CCEs Crop Cutting Experiments
CCLAS Certified Crop Loss Assessors
CGM Chief General Manager
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax
CHAMAN Coordinated Horticulture and Management using geoiNformatics
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System
CPMU Central Program Management Unit
CMM Crop Model Matrix
CNA Central Nodal Agency
CROPIC Collection of Real-time Photos and Observation of Crops
CSC SPV Common Service Centre Special Purpose Vehicle
CSC VLE Common Service Centre Village Level Entrepreneur
CSO Central Statistical Organization
CSC Common Service Centre
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
CTAC Central Level Grievance Redressal Committee
CV Coefficient of Variation
CVC Central Vigilance Commission
DA&FW Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer
DC District Collector
DCCBs District Central Cooperative Banks
DDM District Development Manager
DES Directorate of Economics & Statistics
DGRC District Level Grievance Redressal Committee
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 6 ---
DILRMP Digital India Land Record Modernization Program
DLJC District Level Joint Committee
DLMC District Level Monitoring Committee
DM Deviation Matrix
DM* District Magistrate
DPI Digital Public Infrastructure
DSS Decision Support System
DSSAT Decision Support System for Agrotechnology Transfer
E&MIS Evaluation & Management Information System
ESI Expected Sum Insured
ESR End of Season Report
EVI Enhanced Vegetation Index
NCIP National Crop Insurance Portal
FASAL Forecasting Agricultural Output Using Space, Agrometeorology
and Land Based Observations
FBP Fasal Bima Pathshala
FIAT Fund for Innovation and Technology
FIs Financial Institutions
FY Financial Year
GCA Gross Cropped Area
GCES General Crop Estimation Survey
GFR General Financial Rule
GIC Re General Insurance Corporation of India
GoI Government of India
Govt. Government
GP Gram Panchayat
GRAMS Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System
GRC Grievance Redressal Committee
GRO Grievance Redressal Officer
GST Goods & Service Tax
GT Ground Truth
GWDI Ground Water Drought Index
HQ Headquarter
GWP Gross Written Premium
IA Implementing Agency
IARI Indian Agriculture Research Institute
IASRI Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute
IC Insurance Company
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ID Identity
IEC Information Education and Communication
IFD Integrated Finance Division
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute
IFSC Indian Financial System Code
ILC Inland Letter Card
IMD Indian Meteorological Department
IoT Internet of Things
IR Inception Report
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 7 ---
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization
ISS Interest Subvention Scheme
IT Information Technology
IU Insurance Unit
KCC Kisan Credit Card
KRPH Krishi Rakshak Portal and Helpline
KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendra
KYC Know Your Customer
LAI Leaf Area Index
LC Loss Cost
LDM Lead District Manager
LGD Local Government Directory
LIFO Last In, First Out
LISS Linear Imaging Self Scanning Sensor
LPA Long Period Average
LMS Learning Management System
LPC Land Possession Certificate
LR Loss Ratio
LU Land Use
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MAI Moisture Adequacy Index
MeITY Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology
MIS Management Information System
MISS Modified Interest Subvention Scheme
MITR Mentor Institute for Technical Rollout
MNCFC Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre
MoA&FW Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
MODIS Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
MOEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
MoPR Ministry of Panchayati Raj
MOSDAC Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
MPMH Meri Policy Mere Hath
MSA Mid-Season Adversity
MSP Minimum Support Price
MSR Mid-Season Report
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NADAMS National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System
NCIP National Crop Insurance Portal
NAY National Average Yield
NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
NDWI Normalized Difference Water Index
NER North-Eastern Region
NIA National Insurance Academy
NIU Notified Insurance Unit
NLMC National Level Monitoring Committee
NOAA-CPC National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate
Prediction Centre
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 8 ---
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre,
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization
NSO National Statistical Organization
NSSO National Sample Survey Organization
OG Operational Guidelines
OTP One Time Password
PACS Primary Agricultural Credit Society
PASM Plant Available Soil Moisture
PFMS Public Finance Management System
PMU Program Management Unit
PMFBY Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
PMKISAN Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme
PPP Public-Private Partnership
PRI Panchayati Raj Institutions
QAP Quality Insurance Partner
R&D Research & Development
RBI Reserved Bank of India
RF Rainfall
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
ROR Record of Rights
RRBs Regional Rural Banks
RSI Reservoir Storage Index
RST Remote Sensing Technology
RTI Right to Information
RWBCIS Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme
SAC Space Applications Centre, ISRO
SAO Seasonal Agricultural Operations
SAR Synthetic Aperture Data
SARTHI Sandbox for Agricultural & Rural Security, Technology &
Insurance Platform
SAU State Agricultural University
SC Scheduled Caste
SCBs Scheduled Commercial Banks
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SFDI Stream Flow Drought Index
SGST State Goods and Services Tax
SGRC State Level Grievance Redressal Committee
SI Sum Insured
SLA Service Level Agreement
SLBC State Level Bankers Committee
SLCC State Level Coordination Committee
SLCCCI State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance
SMS Short Message Service
SNA State Nodal Agency
SOF Scale of Finance
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SPI Standardized Precipitation Index
SPMU State Program Management Unit
SR Special Report
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 9 ---
SR-MSA Special Report on Mid-season Adversity
SRPS Special Report for Prevented Sowing
SRSAC State Remote Sensing Application Centre
SST Smart Sampling Technique
ST Scheduled Tribe
STAC State Level Technical Advisory Committee
STSU State Technical Support Unit
TA Technical Agency
TAC Technical Advisory Committee
TCI Temperature Condition Index
TIP Technology Implementation Partner
TY Threshold Yield
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India
UT Union Territory
ULPIN Unique Land Parcel Identification Number
UPIS Unified Package Insurance Scheme
UTR Unique Transaction Reference
VCI Vegetation Condition Index
VEDAS Visualization of Earth Observation Data and Archival System
VHI Vegetation Health Index
VLE Village Level Entrepreneur
WINDS Weather Information Network Data System
WIP WINDS Implementation Partner
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WSL Wide-spread localized Claims
WSPH Wide-spread Post Harvest Losses
YES-TECH Yield Estimation System Based on Technology
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY

--- Page 10 ---
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was launched from Kharif 2016 with
aim to support production in agriculture by providing an affordable crop insurance
product to ensure comprehensive risk cover for crops of farmers against all non-
preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest stage. The Scheme has
completed 16 crop seasons and is being implemented across States/Union
Territories (UTs).
After the commencement of the Scheme, The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India (GoI) has endeavored to make the
Scheme more effective, transparent and auto-administration driven with the
intention to minimize manual interventions and eliminate usage of variable
methodologies for implementation and execution on the ground. This was facilitated
by a detailed set of Operational Guidelines (OGs) and by leveraging efficient and
cutting-edge technological solutions.
Based on the past experiences of implementing the scheme (between 2016-2020),
study reports of various research institutions and feedback received from
stakeholders, the scheme was reviewed, and the revised OGs were brought into
effect from 01st October 2018 addressing major challenges. Also, the Revamped
Operational Guidelines effective from Kharif 2020, addressed the issues related to
long-term tendering, optional coverage to all farmers, increase in the scope of risk
cover and the addition of add-on covers. During the implementation of the scheme
between 2020 & 2022, many representations have come from State
Governments/UT Administrations for flexibility in terms of implementation of the
scheme as per State/UT specific cropping practices and options for alternate risk
management models to manage the risk protection to farmers within given
budgetary provisions. Accordingly, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
(DA&FW), GoI initiated multiple stakeholder consultations with State
Governments/UT Administrations, Farmers Organizations, Insurance Companies
(ICs), Re-Insurance Companies, Financial Institutions, Research and Technical
Organizations and the Ministries & Departments of the GoI and also constituted
working groups for gap analysis and identification of alternate models for Risk
Management and Infusion of Technology to address the demands of the State/UTs
and also to address key challenges associated with implementation of the scheme.
In this new iteration of the Operational Guidelines of PMFBY, an effort has been
made to provide more flexibility to the State/UTs in terms of implementation of the
scheme, to inculcate financial discipline amongst the stakeholders and to infuse
technological interventions within the scheme framework, so as to bring
transparency, objectivity and minimize the potential hazards & disputes.
These operational Guidelines shall be effective from Kharif 2023 onwards and shall
be overriding any provisions or clauses of Tender Document or Contract or
Notification of the State Govts./UTs or conditions or processes which are not in
conformity to these guidelines. Any dispute or grievance of any stakeholder related
to implementation of the scheme shall be addressed as per the provisions of these
guidelines only. Accordingly, the Operational Guidelines 2023 have been updated
and approved for ready reference and adoption by all the stakeholders for effective
implementation of the PMFBY. All the powers of GoI shall be exercised by the
Department/Ministry designated to execute/implement crop insurance schemes in
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
10

--- Page 11 ---
the country, which in this case shall be the Department of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (DA&FW), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (MoA&FW),
Government of India (GoI) and hereafter, the same shall be referred to as ‘GoI’ in
this document.
1. Objective of the Scheme
PMFBY aims at supporting sustainable production in agriculture sector by way of:
• Providing financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of
unforeseen events.
• Stabilizing the income of farmers to ensure their continuance in farming.
• Encouraging farmers to adopt innovative and modern agricultural practices.
• Ensuring credit worthiness of the farmers, crop diversification and enhancing growth
and competitiveness of agriculture sector besides protecting the farmers from
production risks.
• Promoting innovation & research of insurance and allied products so-as-to offer
expanded choice to the farmers and the State Governments/UT Administrations.
2. Adoption of Technology for Scheme Administration
Digital Technology
2.1 In an endeavor to integrate Technology in implementation and execution of the
Scheme, GoI has designed and developed a National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP)
(www.pmfby.gov.in) which has been in use since Kharif 2018. This has brought in
for better administration and coordination amongst stakeholders viz. Farmers,
States, Insurers, insurance intermediaries and Banks as well as ensure real- time
dissemination of information and transparency in implementation.
2.2 Continued & efficient functioning of the Portal successfully calls for responsible
participation by different stakeholders who will have the responsibility for census
coding and regular updating of revenue/administrative units, AWS code mapping
and requisite information/details as per the login credential module.
2.3 Implementing State/UTs and Insurance Companies during each crop season are
required to digitize and upload basic information like notified areas, crops, sum
insured, Government subsidy and premium to be paid by farmers and name of the
implementing Insurance Company in the particular insurance unit etc., on the portal
well within the prescribed timeline. This will facilitate farmers and other stakeholders
to get the relevant information on the Internet and through SMS for the concerned
season. State/UT Government and concerned Insurance Company will be
responsible for any incorrect entry/ errors/ omissions etc. during digitization.
2.4 Digitization of basic information/notification should compulsorily be done before
floating tender documents which will be followed by the entry of L1 Premium rates
and name of the selected Insurance Company immediately after finalization of bids
and issuance of work order.
2.5 Since the NCIP has been operationalized for auto administration and seamless flow
of data/information/reports on real-time basis, the State/UT Government would not
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
11

--- Page 12 ---
be allowed to create/use a separate Portal/website for Crop Insurance purposes*.
(*State of Karnataka which is already running its own portal will have to integrate
with NCIP).
2.6 All Stakeholders have defined roles and responsibilities and accessibility to related
modules on the Portal for the administration of the Scheme. Details of the
operationalization of modules for each stakeholder are available on the Portal.
2.7 Secured credential/login, preferably linked with Aadhaar Number and mobile One
Time Password (OTP) based, for all Stakeholders viz, GoI, State Governments/UT
Administrations, Banks, empaneled Insurance Companies and their designated field
functionaries, Insurance Intermediaries etc. will be provided on the Portal to enable
them to enter/upload/download the requisite information.
2.8 The Insurance Companies shall not distribute/collect/allow any other
proforma/utility/web-Portal etc. for collecting details of insured farmers separately.
However, they may provide all requisite support to facilitate Bank Branches/Primary
Agriculture Credit Societies (PACS) /Common Service Centers (CSCs)/Banking
Correspondents (BCs) for uploading the farmers' details on the Portal well within the
prescribed cut-off dates.
2.9 Only those farmers whose data is uploaded on the NCIP, and their share of premium
has been remitted to the concerned Insurance Company within the prescribed time
limit, shall be eligible for Insurance coverage. The premium subsidy from the
State/UT and the GoI shall be released accordingly as per the timelines and
modalities defined in the Operational Guidelines.
2.10 All data pertaining to crop-wise, Insurance Unit (IU) wise historical yield data,
Notional value of average yield/Scale of Finance (SOF), Sown Area, Coverage and
Claims data, Threshold Yield (TY) and Actual Yield (AY) shall be made
available/uploaded by the State/UT Government on the NCIP for the purpose of
premium rating, claim calculation, etc. For the calculation of admissible claims for
RWBCIS, requisite information like weather data, detailed term sheet with triggers
and exit values and notional sum insured etc. will be uploaded on the NCIP by the
concerned State/UT Government. The data uploaded on the NCIP shall be the only
single source of truth and mandatorily shall be provided to the Insurance Companies
along with Bid Document for Burn Cost calculation and Risk Pricing. No other source
of data shall be used for Risk Pricing for Bidding in the tenders other than the data
uploaded and approved by State/UTs on the NCIP. In case this clause is not adhered
to, the Government of India share of subsidy shall not be released for the concerned
State/UT.
2.11 The Banks/Financial Institutions (FIs)/other intermediaries need to compulsorily
transfer the individual farmer's data electronically to the NCIP. Accordingly,
banks/FIs may endeavor to undertake Core Banking Solution (CBS) integration
in a time bound manner for real-time transfer of information/data.
2.12 The NCIP having details of insured farmers under PMFBY shall be dovetailed with
Kisan Rin Portal (KRP), having details of all the farmers availing subsidized short
term agriculture loans through Kisan Credit Card under Modified Interest Subvention
Scheme (MISS) of the GoI & PM KISAN database having pre-identified farmers
receiving benefits under PM Kisan Samman Nidhi scheme of GoI. The
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
12

--- Page 13 ---
data/information of both the Schemes shall be auto synchronized to enable real-time
sharing of information and better program monitoring.
2.13 With a view to keep pace with the massive innovations happening for making
agriculture financially resilient and to achieve the objective of meeting Sustainable
Development Goals, the scheme envisages to foster the innovation and
development of effective technology solutions under PMFBY ecosystem to make the
scheme more effective and farmers more resilient & protected. Implementing
Insurance Companies may contribute funds in order to promote innovation and
research & collaborate with the technical institutions, start-ups/Fin-tech/Insure-tech
& Agri-tech entities of the country & across the globe. The potential technologies
solutions shall be first evaluated and recommended by GoI for pilot-rollout. The pilots
shall be carried out by the implementing Insurance Companies collectively and/or
individually for strengthening the technology models and solutions for PMFBY.
Further, the GoI shall review and examine the results of such pilots/research for final
adoption within scheme ecosystem.
Remote Sensing & Other Technologies
2.14 The Insurance Companies & States/UTs shall compulsorily use innovative
technology & mobile applications for monitoring of crop health through CROPIC App,
reporting of crop damage through Crop Loss Assessment App and Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs) through CCE Agri App etc., in coordination with the concerned
State/UTs. State/UTs shall also facilitate Insurance Companies with Satellite
Imagery wherever required and facilitate usage of drones as per the SOP issued by
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, GoI. Such data and information may further be sourced
and utilized for further analysis under the purview of PMFBY. Insurance Companies
can also use the services of the Government or technical agencies empaneled by
the GoI or its authorized agency or committee for conducting relevant studies &
validation for better monitoring and ground-truth. Insurance Companies should play
an active role of being partners in facilitating and promotion of use of technology and
other innovations in the scheme implementation.
2.15 The Department of the State/UT Government responsible for managing the digital
land record and its web-portal will facilitate the integration of land record with NCIP
and provide Application Programming Interface (API), free of cost, for smooth
access to the land records of the concerned farmer for validation on NCIP.
2.16 Suitable technology & modalities shall also be explored and adopted for using Smart
Sampling Technique (SST) for conducting CCEs required for arriving at
proportionate Crop Yield Estimation along with direct yield estimation using different
technology models as prescribed in YES-TECH Manual 2023.
2.17 Yield Estimation System based on Technology (YES-TECH) for direct estimation of
yield at Gram Panchayat (GP) level has been rolled out from Kharif 2023 season
onwards as per the provisions of YES-TECH Manual 2023, as amended from time
to time.
2.18 YES-TECH shall be further augmented through Collection of Real-time Photos and
Observations of Crops (CROPIC) initiative, wherein crop health will be monitored by
taking periodic photos of standing or peril-affected crop at pre-determined interval
of its growth with GPS coordinates, three to five times during the season for
assessing the crop condition at different stages of the crop life cycle.
2.19 A national level network of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Automatic Rain
Gauges (ARG) shall also be established under the Weather Information Network
Data System (WINDS) initiative as per the provisions of the WINDS Manual 2023,
as amended from time to time, creating a strong and resilient platform for generation
of long-term hyper-local weather data information for Crop insurance, agriculture
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
13

--- Page 14 ---
advisory and disaster risk resilience needs of different sectors.
2.20 State/UTs shall adopt use of technology, such as satellite imagery, drones,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and remote sensing for various applications such
as crop area estimation, yield disputes resolution and promote innovation and use
of technology solutions such as remote sensing and other related technology
solutions and mobile applications for CCE planning, yield estimation, loss
assessment, assessment of prevented sowing and clustering of districts etc.
2.21 Use of technology derived solutions for calculation of Yield will be triggered in the
following instances when:
Requisite number of CCEs have not been conducted at the Insurance Unit (IU) level
or one level higher than the IU level.
2.22 Or
The yield data submitted by the Nodal Department of the State/UT Government is
disputed by the IC due to non-compliance of the defined procedure for conducting
CCEs.
2.23 Or
The Nodal Department of State/UT Government is unable to submit Actual or
approved yield data (CCE Agri App based) for at-least 90% of total Crop Cutting
Experiments (CCEs) conducted, within 2 months of the cut-off date of completion of
CCEs.
2.24 To develop a framework for Research Studies & Working Papers by academia &
Multilateral bodies, GoI may enter into bilateral or multilateral arrangements /
agreements with any relevant national / international institutions/organizations, for
the purpose.
3. Coverage of Farmers
3.1 All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notified crops in
the notified areas are eligible for coverage. However, farmers should have insurable
interest on the insured crops and lands. Such farmers are required to submit
necessary documentary evidence of land records prevailing in the State (Records
of Right (RoR), Land Possession Certificate (LPC) etc.) and/or applicable contract/
agreement details/ other documents notified/ permitted by concerned State
Governments/UT Administrations pertaining to sharecroppers/tenant farmers and
the same should be defined by the respective States/UTs in the notification itself.
Tribal farmers and forest dwellers having cultivation in forest land under FRA are also allowed
to be insured under the scheme. The farmers cultivating community owned land especially
as is practiced in NER states are also allowed to be covered under the scheme with
certification from village head or revenue authorities. All such farmers are also required to
essentially submit Aadhaar Number and declaration about the crop sown/ crops
intended to be sown.
3.1.1 Farmers availing the Kisan Credit Card (KCC)/Crop Loan/Loanee Farmers
3.1.1.1 The scheme is optional for all farmers including farmers who have been sanctioned
short-term Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) loans though Kisan Credit Card
(KCC) for the notified crops from defined Financial Institutions (hereinafter referred
to as Loanee farmers). Existing Loanee farmers who do not want to get covered
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
14

--- Page 15 ---
under the scheme have the option of opting-out from the Schemes by submitting
requisite declaration to loan sanctioning bank branches any time during the year but
at least seven days prior to the cut-off date for enrolment of farmers for the respective
season. All those farmers who do not submit the declaration would be essentially
covered.
3.1.1.2 Farmer whose KCC loan has become sub-standard as defined and as per prevailing
practices of the concerned Banks and/or Government regulator shall not be
considered as a Loanee farmer. However, bank branches may facilitate such
farmers for enrolment as non-loanee farmers.
3.1.1.3 Merely, sanctioning of crop loan against other collateral securities including fixed
deposits, gold/jewel loans, mortgage loans etc. without having insurable interest
of the farmer on the insurable land and notified crops shall not be eligible for
coverage under the Scheme.
3.1.2 Other Farmers/Non-loanee Farmers
As mentioned in Para 3.1.1.1 above, the Scheme is optional for all farmers
including non-loanee farmers/other farmers.
3.1.2.1 The insurance coverage will strictly be equivalent to the sum insured per hectare, as
defined in the Government notification or /and on NCIP multiplied by proposed
insured- area for notified crop for enrolment.
3.1.3 Special efforts shall be made to ensure maximum coverage of Scheduled Caste
(SC)/ Scheduled Tribe (ST)/ Women farmers under the Scheme. Further Panchayat
Raj Institutions (PRIs) may be involved in the extension activities and awareness
creation among farmers and obtaining feedback from farmers about the
implementation of the Scheme.
3.1.4 The implementing Insurance Company selected as lowest rate bidder (L1) will be
responsible for taking necessary measures to ensure at least 10% incremental
increase in coverage of non-loanee farmers in the allocated district. However, other
empaneled Insurance Companies which have participated in the bidding process
and are keen for enrolment of non-loanee farmers in the cluster may also be allowed
to enroll non-loanee farmers at L1 premium rate using their respective network of
intermediaries and manpower using digital platform of App for Intermediary
Enrollment (AIDE) and NCIP. The interested companies must inform their
willingness in writing within 7 days of the finalization of tender/issuance of work order
to L1. It will however be the responsibility of all the Insurance Company engaged in
this process to ensure that duplicate enrolment does not happen in the given
cluster/district and therefore shall mandatorily use AIDE App for the purpose.
Engaging companies other than L1 for enrolling non-loanee farmers is allowed for
all Districts notified and allocated by the State Governments/UT Administrations.
The enrolment of non-loanee farmers shall be as per the conditions laid down in
Para 17.7.
3.1.5 These Insurance Companies shall use digital means such as AIDE App for
enrollment of farmers and complete the process as per the seasonality discipline
detailed in Para 16.4. The same Insurance Company which has enrolled the farmers
shall be liable for the payment of claims to such farmers basis the localized crop
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
15

--- Page 16 ---
damage assessment conducted by the L1 Insurance Company or crop damage
report and crop yield data given by the concerned State Govt.
3.1.6 The exchange of information and co-witnessing of CCEs for the district by the
Government/NCIP will be limited to L1 Company only and it will be binding on other
companies to accept the yield data. The Nodal Department of State
Governments/UT Administrations shall share the yield data with all concerned
Insurance Companies for the computation of claims in the relevant IUs where they
have enrolled non-loanee farmers. Requisition for payment of Government subsidy
in respect of non-loanee farmers enrolled by the other Insurance Companies shall
be submitted directly through NCIP to the Central Nodal Agency designated by GoI
for the purpose. Claim calculation for the applications and IUs shall be done
simultaneously on NCIP based on the relevant crop-wise, IU-wise crop damage and
yield data, weather data etc. entered/shared by the respective State
Governments/UT Administrations.
3.1.7 A detailed SOP/Manual and modalities of the enrollment of non-loanee farmers at L1
premium rate by other unsuccessful bidders shall be notified by the GoI separately.
3.2 Universal Coverage
3.2.1 The States / UTs shall make all efforts for providing insurance protection to all the
farmers including tenant farmers, sharecroppers as well as loanee or non-loanee
farmers in their respective State /UT. To achieve this Universal Coverage under
PMFBY, States/UTs may adopt following approaches:
3.2.1.1 Full Universalization: Complete farmer database would be fetched on the NCIP
through the pre-validated, Land Parcel, Crop & Farmers KYC database of the
concerned State/UT. Enrolment through any other channels will not be required
under full universal coverage. The States may consider for opting full
universalization in the interest of the farmers with following pre-requisites:
• Digitized Land Records
• Farm level Season-wise Crop Data
• Farm Level KYC validated Farmer’s Database
• Data collection as per PMFBY Requirements
• API based Data Exchange with NCIP
3.2.1.2 Preferential Universalization: The States/UTs can incentivize the enrolment of
farmers under the scheme by subsidizing the farmer’s premium partially or
completely. State/UT may decide to deduct a token amount from the farmer’s
account during enrolment. Farmers will be enrolled through the traditional enrolment
channels under the scheme.
4. Coverage of Crops
I. Food crops (Cereals, Millets and Pulses).
II. Oilseeds.
III. Annual Commercial / Annual Horticultural crops.
IV. In addition, pilots for coverage can be taken up for those perennial
horticultural/commercial crops for which standard methodology for yield estimation
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
16

--- Page 17 ---
or correlation between weather condition and yield/output is available.
V. Other crops including plantations crops may also be included in the scope of scheme
subject to approval of respective ministries of Govt. of India. A separate
communication shall be issued by the GoI as and when such inclusions are required
and approved.
5. Coverage of Risks and Exclusions
5.1 Basic Cover: The basic cover under the scheme covers the risk of yield loss to
standing crops (sowing to harvesting). This comprehensive risk insurance is
provided to cover yield losses on an area-based approach basis, against non-
preventable risks like drought, dry spells, flood, inundation, wide-spread pest and
disease attack, landslides, natural fire due to lightening, storm, hailstorm, and
cyclone.
5.2 Add-On Coverage: Apart from the mandatory basic cover, the State
Governments/UT Administrations, in consultation with the State Level Coordination
Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) may choose any or all of the following add-
on covers, based on the need of the specific crop/area in their State/UT to cover the
following stages of the crop and risks leading to crop loss.
5.2.1 Prevented Sowing/Planting/Germination Risk: Insured area is prevented from
sowing/planting/germination due to deficit rainfall or adverse seasonal/climatic
conditions.
5.2.2 Mid-Season Adversity: Loss in case of adverse seasonal conditions during the crop
season viz. floods, prolonged dry spells and severe drought etc., wherein expected
yield during the season is likely to be less than 50% of the normal yield. This add-on
feature facilitates the provision for immediate relief (On- Account payment) to
insured farmers in case of occurrence of such risks.
5.2.3 Post-Harvest Losses: Coverage is available only up to a maximum period of two
weeks from harvesting, for those crops which are required to be dried in cut and
spread / small, bundled condition depending on requirement of the crops in that area
and left in the field after harvesting, against specific perils of hailstorm, cyclone,
cyclonic rains and unseasonal rains.
5.2.4 Localized Calamities: Loss/damage to notified insured crops resulting from
occurrence of identified localized risks of hailstorm, landslide, inundation, cloud burst
and natural fire due to lightening affecting isolated farms in the notified area.
5.2.5 Add-on coverage for crop loss due to attack by wild animals: The States/UTs
may consider providing add-on coverage for crop loss due to the attack by wild
animals wherever the risk is perceived to be substantial and is identifiable. The
detailed protocol and procedure for evaluation of the bids has been prepared by the
GoI in consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
(MOEF&CC) and General Insurance Corporation of India (GIC Re). The add-on
coverage will be optional for the farmers and applicable premium, in full, shall be
borne by the farmer, however, the State Governments/UT Administrations may
consider providing additional subsidy on this coverage, wherever notified. The
Central Govt. subsidy on premium shall not be available for this add-on cover. The
actuarial premium rates for this add-on cover should be sought in the bid itself from
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
17

--- Page 18 ---
the Insurance Companies, however the add-on actuarial premium rate will be
considered separately and shall not form part of evaluation of L1. Detailed modalities
are annexed as Annexure - I for adoption by States/UTs.
5.3 States/UTs have to notify crop-wise specific period/duration for coverage of
aforesaid add-on risks in their notification as detailed in Para 7.2 of this guideline
and the same will also be uploaded on NCIP.
5.4 General Exclusions: Losses arising out of war and nuclear risks, malicious damage
and other preventable risks shall be excluded.
5.5 Loss/damage for localized calamities and post-harvest losses will be assessed at
the level of the individual insured farm and hence intimation of loss by the
farmer/designated agencies or nodal departments is essential. For remaining risks
i.e. losses due to wide-spread calamities, lodging of intimation for claims by insured
farmers / designated agencies or nodal departments for such wide-spread calamities
is not essential. Claims of wide-spread calamity shall be calculated based on the
loss assessment report submitted by the District Level Joint Committee (DLJC)
and/or actual yield submitted by concerned State Governments/UT Administrations.
5.6 Details of indemnification and claims calculation for aforesaid risk covers are
provided in Para 21.
5.7 Risk Management Mechanisms under the Scheme
5.7.1 The Scheme shall operate mainly on complete ‘risk transfer’ approach wherein
complete risk is transferred to implementing Insurance Companies. This will involve
bearing of the entire claim liability by the insurance company for the discovered
premium.
5.7.2 However, if the State Governments/UT Administrations strongly believe that they
need to partake in some of the elements of the risk, they may explore opting for ‘risk
participation’ approach. This shall entail adoption of alternate models by the States
wherein the claims as well as premium surplus is shared between the Government
and the implementing insurance company as per the pre-agreed formula. The States
may choose to implement any of the following models:
i. Profit & loss sharing model.
ii. Cup & Cap model (60:130)
iii. Cup & Cap model (80:110)
5.7.3 Any pilot for a model other than those listed above can be taken up in one State at
a time with the approval of Union Agriculture Minister and Union Finance Minister.
5.7.4 Following shall be the modalities specific to Risk Participation Approach:
5.7.4.1 “Profit & Loss” Sharing Mechanism:
Parameter Specifications
Risk Sh aring Insurance Company – up to loss ratios of 100%
Insurance Company & Government (GoI and State Govt.) – Risk sharing beyond
100% as per proposed structure
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
18

--- Page 19 ---
Surplus S haring Loss ratio between 0%-100%, Insurance Company & Government (GoI and State
Govt.) get surplus as per the sharing structure given below.
Layers of Profit /loss % Retention by InsurRereturn to States Sharing of
0% 50% 15% 85% Profit
50% 65% 60% 40%
(Ploughed back)
65% 100% 95% 5%
100% 130% 95% 5% Loss
130% 220% 60% 40%
(Shared)
220% 350% 15% 85%
Example:
Profit Sharing @ Loss Ratio of 0% Loss Sharing @ Loss Ratio of 350%
Profit = 100%- LR = 100% Loss = 100%- LR = -250%
Insurer Profit = (layer (0%- 50%) Insurer Loss = (layer (220%- 350%)
=50%) *(15% share of Profit) + layer = - 130%) * (15% share of loss
(65%-50% =15%) * (60% share of (220%-350%) + layer (130%-220%
Profit) + Layer (100%- 65% = = -90%) * (60% share of Loss) +
35%)*(95% share of Profit) Layer (100%- 130% = 30%) * (95%
share of Loss)
= 7.5% + 9% + 33.25% = 49.75% of
the Premium = (-19.5%) +(- 54%) +(-28.5%) = -
102% of the premium
State share of Profit = 100% - 49.75%
= 50.25% of the premium State Share of Loss = -250% - (-
102%) = - 148% of the Loss
Conditions:
I. Liabilities:
a. GoI subsidy sharing will be based on L1 quoted Actuarial Premium Rates (APR)
b. GoI will participate equally with State/UT Government in any claim liability as per the
structure (as above).
c. Sharing of claim liabilities between Insurance Company and Government (GoI and
State/UT) will be done at cluster & season level or at the level of determination of L1
bidder & season level.
II. Surplus Sharing:
a. GoI will share surplus (if any) equally with State Governments/UT Administrations
as per the structure (as above)
b. Surplus sharing between Insurance Company and Government (GoI and State/UT)
will be done at cluster & season level or at the level of determination of L1 bidder &
season level.
c. Any surplus will be shared equally between the GoI and State Governments/UT
Administrations. Further it shall be deposited back into consolidated fund of GoI or
State/UT respectively.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
19

--- Page 20 ---
5.7.4.2 “Cup & Cap” model (60:130)
Parameter Specifications
Insurance Company – up to loss ratios of 130%
Risk Sharing
Government (GoI and State Govt. equally) – loss ratio > 130%
Loss ratio between 0%-60% - Insurance Company retains 40% &
Surplus Sharing Government (GoI and State Govt. equally) get remaining (60%
LR)
Conditions:
I. Liabilities:
a. GoI subsidy sharing will be based on L1 quoted Actuarial Premium Rates (APR).
b. GoI will participate equally with State/UT Government in any claim liability arising
due to claim ratio exceeding 130%.
c. Sharing of claim liabilities between Insurance Company and Government (GoI and
State/UT) will be done at cluster & season level or at the level of determination of L1
bidder & season level.
II. Surplus Sharing:
a. GoI will share surplus (if any) equally with State/UT Government if the claim ratio
are less than 60%
b. Surplus sharing between Insurance Company and Government (GoI and State/UT)
will be done at cluster & season level or at the level of determination of L1 bidder&
season level.
c. Any surplus will be shared equally between GoI and State/UT Government. Further
it shall be deposited back into consolidated fund of GoI or State/UT respectively.
5.7.4.3 “Cup & Cap” Model (80-110)
Parameters Specifications
Insurance Company – up to loss ratios of 110%
Risk Sharing
State Govt. – loss ratio > 110%
Loss ratio between 0%-80% - Insurance Company retains 20% & State
Surplus Sharing
Govt. get remaining (80% - Actual LR)
Conditions:
I. Liabilities:
a. GoI subsidy sharing will be restricted to cluster level burn cost calculated for the
current year + 15% of burn cost (towards administrative and other expenses) or L1
quoted actuarial premium rates, whichever is lower. Other provisions of the
Operational Guidelines of PMFBY will be applicable as envisaged. The level of
calculation shall be cluster and season level or at the level of determination of L1
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
20

--- Page 21 ---
bidder & season level.
b. GoI will not participate with State/UT Government in any claim liability.
c. Sharing of claim liabilities between Insurance Company and State Governments/UT
Administrations will be done at cluster level or at the level of determination of L1
bidder & season level.
II. Surplus Sharing:
a. GoI will not share surplus (if any) with State/UT Government if the claim ratio is less
than 80%
b. Surplus sharing between Insurance Company and State/UT Government will be
done at cluster & season level or at the level of determination of L1 bidder & season
level.
c. Any surplus shall be deposited back to State/UT treasury.
5.7.4.4 Claim settlement under “Cup & Cap” Models:
a) Claim settlement under “Cup& Cap” Models at Cluster level for any given season
upto the given threshold will be the responsibility of the implementing Insurance
Company. The claim exceeding the given threshold limit as per risk-sharing pattern,
shall be met fully by the State Govt. under “Cup-& Cap (80-110) and by GoI and
State/UT government under “Cup-& Cap (60-130) in equal proportion. The State
Govt./GoI as the case may be; shall remit their share of claim liability to the
concerned Insurance Company for onward remittance to the beneficiary farmer
through DigiClaim module of NCIP.
b) The implementing Insurance Company shall be liable to release the claim at cluster
level & season level for any given season up to the extent of threshold limit as per
the Risk Participation Model adopted by the State Govt./UT without waiting for
States/UTs to contribute the balance claim liabilities. For delay in claim payment of
liabilities of the Insurance Companies caused while waiting for pending claim
liabilities to be released by States/UTs, Insurance Companies shall be liable to pay
penal interest as per Para 16.14 of these guidelines.
5.7.4.5 Calculation of Burn Cost under “Cup & Cap (80-110)” Model:
Burn Cost (BC) for notified crop(s) under the Cup & Cap 80-110 ARTM model for
the given cluster and season and comparison with the L1 quoted APR shall be done
by the CPMU of GoI in order to calculate the applicable liability of GoI towards
premium subsidy. The burn cost shall also be provided on NCIP itself based on the
available historical yield data uploaded by the State/UTs on NCIP and the actual
season’s insured acreage. The States/UTs shall be liable to pay the additional
premium subsidy to concerned insurance companies due to underlying restriction of
GoI liability as per adopted Risk Participation model.
5.8 Sandbox for Agricultural & Rural Security, Technology & Insurance
Platform (SARTHI) & Product Innovation
5.8.1 With a view to enhance the access to agriculture & allied insurance products for
farmers and to increase penetration of insurance adoption in the Agri ecosystem,
GoI intends to create an ecosystem for varied insurance products (for the agro
industry) wherein the different stakeholders of the insurance industry like Insurance
companies, Reinsurance companies, Insurance Intermediaries and innovators, like
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
21

--- Page 22 ---
Agritech and Fintech, startups can come together and work towards extending
customized risk protection solutions to farming community in addition to current crop
insurance products under PMFBY & RWBCIS. Other insurance products such as
parameterized insurance products for non-notified PMFBY crops, parametric
disaster risk insurance products, available product offerings (or components) under
earlier run Unified Package Insurance Scheme (UPIS) such as Personal accident,
Livestock, Fire (contents & buildings), Life insurance offerings and non-subsidized
add-on covers of PMFBY & RWBCIS, among others can be offered to the farming
& rural community which will help in bringing financial resilience and risk mitigation
in their lives and livelihoods.
5.8.2 GoI for this purpose would explore potential collaborations between different
stakeholders to facilitate the development of a comprehensive and secure digital
SARTHI platform and dovetail it with NCIP, wherein all insurance product offerings
relevant to farming and rural communities around the country such as mentioned
above along with current crop insurance products are offered within a single
ecosystem of PMFBY through a single window to the target communities, catering
to their specific needs. This ecosystem will be capitalized by different actors of the
insurance industry resulting in proliferation of all insurance products which can be
offered to the agriculture and allied sectors while ensuring end-to-end traceability
and transparency of transactions in a secured digital environment.
5.8.3 A unified Agri insurance ecosystem will have the following features:
 Digitization of the Agri & other Insurance product offerings ecosystem in a stable,
secure environment.
 Greater degree of information sharing and collaboration between the agriculture and
allied sectors and the insurance industry stakeholders.
 Customization of all possible products & their availability for farmers relevant for their
demography and profile.
 Cost Reduction in overall premium for farmers leading to increased coverage &
earning potential while achieving risk mitigation.
 Higher penetration & accessibility to insurance products for farming & rural
communities in different demographics.
 In the long term it’ll also provide specific data to the GoI on the insurance needs of
the farmers and other rural stakeholders, which can then be rolled out as schemes
for their benefit.
5.8.4 To facilitate a comprehensive risk protection environment for Agriculture and Rural
sector, GoI will build an open-source digital platform which will provide seamless
integration of different insurance products approved by IRDAI & offered by Insurance
Companies and allow for digital distribution of the products via various distribution
channels directly to the farmers through a farmer facing application. This digital
platform will help offer the bouquet of products curated by the insurance companies
for the agriculture & rural communities and will offer custom-made insurance
products tailored as per the specific needs and the risks faced by the farmers in
different regions across complete agriculture value chain.
5.8.5 Govt. of India though a consultative committee comprising of insurance industry
experts, regulators, academia, Insurtech/agri-tech startups and experts from multi-
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
22

--- Page 23 ---
lateral national/international agencies and technical agencies/institutions shall
oversee and foster the adoption and promotion of SARTHI for rural & agricultural
risk protection and resilience development through Insurance mechanism.
5.8.6 IRDAI has also been leveraging digital technology to achieve the vision of “Insurance
for All” by 2047 where every citizen has an appropriate life, health and property
insurance cover and every enterprise is supported by appropriate insurance
solutions. Therefore, IRDAI in addition to various administrative and strategic
initiatives is also developing various technology platforms and distribution channels
for the purpose of increasing financial risk protection through insurance and thereby
enabling a comprehensive risk resilience in Indian communities and economy at
large. Accordingly, few digital platforms like Bima Sugam (digital portal for all
insurance transactions), Bima Vahak (women centric rural insurance distribution
channel), Bima Vistaar (all-in-one affordable insurance product covering risks
against life, health, and property) & Bima Bharosa (a platform for complaint
registration and grievance redressal) are being developed. SARTHI Platform shall
therefore be integrated with all these platforms for seamless information sharing and
leveraging mutual capabilities.
5.8.7 A detailed SOP/Manual and modalities of the SARTHI Platform and Product
Innovation including the product designing and validation protocols shall be notified
by the GoI separately.
6. Preconditions for Implementation of the Scheme
6.1 State/UTs
Issuance of Notification by the State Governments/UT Administrations for the
implementation of the Scheme shall imply their acceptance of all the provisions,
modalities and Operational Guidelines of the Scheme. The main conditions relating
to the scheme which are binding on the States/UTs are as follows:
6.1.1 Digitization of IU-wise administrative/revenue hierarchy along with Scheme; crops;
level of IUs notified, crop-wise sum insured, crop-wise indemnity level, crop-wise
Threshold Yield (TY) at Insurance Unit (IU) level for notified crops, opted risk
coverage, details of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS), Automatic Rain Gauges
(ARG), which shall be stationed as per the standards defined in the WINDS Manual
2023 and integration of digitized land records with NCIP.
6.1.2 Adoption of innovative technology especially YES-TECH for direct yield estimation
at Gram Panchayat (GP) level as per the standards and specifications given in the
YES-TECH Manual 2023, CROPIC for conducting crop health monitoring during the
crop life cycle, WINDS for setting up AWSs and ARGs as per standards and
specifications mentioned in the WINDS Manual 2023 and 100% usage of different
applications and tools viz. CCE-Agri App for capturing the conduct of CCEs, AIDE
App for enrollment of Farmers, Crop damage assessment through Crop Loss Survey
App and the use of NCIP platform to enable seamless flow of data & information and
auto administration of the scheme.
6.1.3 Making an additional provision of a separate budget allocation of 3% of the total
budget of the Scheme for administrative expenses from Financial Year (FY) 2023-
24 for meeting the day-to-day expenses for monitoring, Information Education &
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
23

--- Page 24 ---
Communication (IEC) and evaluation activities and other administrative work related
to the implementation of the Scheme such as recruitment and deployment of
manpower in state PMUs, infrastructure development, etc.
6.1.4 Adopt Smart Sampling Technology for conducting requisite number of CCEs at the
level of notified IU area and approve the actual yield data as recorded in the CCE
Agri App.
6.1.5 To finalize CCE and YES-TECH based final yield estimation data on the NCIP to
enable auto-calculation of claims. In case the Nodal Department does not
provide/upload actual yield data within 2 months of the notified CCE completion date,
technology derived solutions will be used for the computation of Yield Data for claim
settlement.
6.1.6 In order to ensure timely release of subsidy and to maintain strict financial discipline
in the scheme implementation, the release of subsidy shall be guided by the following
provisions:
I. The release of subsidy shall follow a seasonal chronology.
II. Notwithstanding any legal order specifically restricting the release of subsidy the
subsidy component of previous season shall be settled first from any future
contributions.
III. All the financial transactions (subsidy and claims) including farmers premium being
paid by State/UTs adopting Full or Preferential Universalization shall be routed
through National Crop Insurance Portal only.
IV. The States/UTs are required to commit their liabilities in advance as per modalities
mentioned hereunder:
Start
Notification of Advance Subsidy
PMFBY by State/UT Digitization on NCIP deposited in Escrow
Account
Whether the Escrow A/c
Advance Subsidy
Yes d e p o s i t e d i n
Escrow Account?
No
CNA to Confirm on NCIP
NCIP Activated for
Enrollments
End
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
24

--- Page 25 ---
6.1.7 State/UT shall release an amount equivalent to 50% previous season’s total
State/UT Government liability on approved application data as the advance upfront
premium subsidy, and the same shall be deposited in the ‘Escrow Account’ by the
State/UT Government before the start of enrolment for the season.
I. In case of State/UTs adopting Full or Preferential Universalization, wherein the part
of farmer share is also subsidized by the State/UT Government, 50% State share of
advance upfront premium subsidy shall be equal to the 50% of the actual State
Share plus the farmer share after adjusting token farmer share of current
season/year.
II. Interest income accrued on the deposited amount in the Escrow Account shall be
subsumed in the subsidy component of the concerned State/UT
Illustration of Advance Payment of subsidy premiums:
Previous
Farmer's Year Previous
Upfront
Share Season's Year Upfront
Types of PMFBY Farmer's Premium
Number of Subsidize Total Season's Premium
Implementation Share Subsidy -
Applications d by State/UT Total GoI Subsidy -
Model (Rs.) State/UT
State/UT GWP GWP GoI
(Rs.)
(Rs.) Share Share (Rs.)
(Rs.)
Standard PMFBY 5,000 1,00,000 0 50,00,000 50,00,000 25,00,000 25,00,000
Preferential
Universalization 5,000 5,000 95,000 50,00,000 50,00,000 25,95,000 25,00,000
Full
Universalization 5,000 0 1,00,000 50,00,000 50,00,000 26,00,000 25,00,000
III. The CNA shall release from the Escrow Account, an amount equivalent to maximum
50% of the previous season’s total State/UT’s liability on approved application data
as the advance upfront premium subsidy, upon release of work order by State/UT
or before the start of enrolment for the season, as the case may be, subject to
submission of demand for the same by the concerned Insurance Companies.
IV. Similarly, the GoI will release an amount equivalent to maximum 50% of previous
season’s total GoI liability on approved application data as the advance upfront
premium subsidy, on receipt of intimation regarding allocation of work order or
before the start of enrolment for the season, as the case may be, subject to
submission of demand for the same by the concerned Insurance Companies.
V. In case the demand for subsidy premium is raised by Insurance Companies after
start of enrolment, respective share of State/UT and GoI equivalent to 50% of the
total respective liability as per the current season’s paid application data would be
remitted. The farmers share will be subsequently deducted during the enrolment
window. The principle of ‘Farmer pays Last’ shall be followed.
VI. The Escrow Account shall be jointly administered by the State/UT Government and
GoI and maintained in any Scheduled Commercial Bank to be chosen by the
State/UT Government. Detailed guidelines on Escrow Account shall be notified by
the GoI.
VII. NCIP would only be opened for enrolment upon remittance of the above-
mentioned advance upfront premium by the concerned State/UT Government
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
25

--- Page 26 ---
to the Escrow Account and upon receipt of electronic confirmation of the same
from the CNA to the GoI. This mechanism shall be mandatorily applicable from
Rabi 2024 onwards.
VIII. Subsequent tranches of the premium subsidy would be released, as per seasonality
discipline, on reconciliation of data and submission of demand by the respective
Insurance Companies. The payment of subsequent tranches will be based on
current season’s approved applications only.
IX. In case of excess premium being released by the Governments (GoI or State/UT)
due to pending calculation of final GoI liability on account of delay on season’s
closure or due to reduction of insured area/applications at later stage, the
corresponding excess premium shall be returned by the concerned Insurance
Company to concerned Governments (GoI or State/UT) within 7 days from closure
of season and finalization of insured acreage. Such excess premium shall not be
allowed to be adjusted against demand for other/following season or against other
scheme (PMFBY or RWBCIS).
X. The release of GoI subsidy shall not be dependent on release of the State/UT
subsidy for all seasons covered under the scheme including past seasons. The
insurance companies shall raise separate simultaneous demands for State/UT and
GoI subsidy share for the season. Accordingly, payable claims shall also be released
by the concerned insurance companies on pro-rata basis to the farmers in
accordance with the already received GoI and State/UT Government subsidy. The
Insurance Company can at the maximum hold claims equivalent to the outstanding
premium amount at any given point of time.
6.1.8 To carry out pilot studies for improved yield estimations using technology. Adoption of
protocol/Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for smart sampling technique (SST)
and direct yield estimation procedure as issued and modified by the GoI from time to
time.
6.1.9 The present composition of the State level Coordination Committee on Crop
Insurance (SLCCCI) includes the representation of concerned Departments of the
State Governments/UT Administrations, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National Bank
for Agriculture Rural Development (NABARD), empaneled Insurance Companies
and the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBCs) which may be strengthened by
including representatives from the State Horticulture Department, State Remote
Sensing Application Centre (SRSAC), India Meteorological Department (IMD),
experts from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)/State Agriculture
Universities (SAU), Mentor Institute for Technology Rollout (MITRs), Quality
Assurance Partners (QAPs) and Farmers' Representatives including women
farmers for implementing PMFBY. Chairman of the State Level Coordination
Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) may co-opt representatives from other
departments/agencies, if considered necessary.
6.1.10 Adequate preparedness for ensuring availability of all crop loss and yield data on
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) as computation of claims including those
related to add-on cover will be done mandatorily on the basis of data uploaded on
NCIP.
6.1.11 Grievance redressal and resolution of complaints and queries of farmers raised
through any of the mode including Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline within timelines
outlined in the SOP/Manual of Grievance Redressal, which shall be issued by the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
26

--- Page 27 ---
GoI separately.
6.2 Insurance Companies (ICs)
Empanelment of Insurance Companies and their participation for the implementation
of the Scheme shall imply their acceptance of all provisions, modalities and
guidelines of the Schemes. The empaneled Insurance Companies must deploy
requisite infrastructure and resources for the implementation of PMFBY particularly
for the following identified major activities:
6.2.1 To carry out pilot studies and research for leveraging new technology for the
effective implementation of Scheme in a transparent & efficient manner.
6.2.2 Deployment of requisite infrastructure to widen the outreach of the Scheme and
enabling access to related services to the rural farmers at their doorstep, with a
commitment for at least 10% incremental increase in non-loanee coverage for a
season at District level.
6.2.3 Deployment of sufficient manpower to co-observe CCEs and allied activities and
compulsory use of CCE Agri App, CROPIC App, Crop Loss Assessment App, their
digital web portals and other digital Apps and platforms rolled out by GoI from time
to time.
6.2.4 Allocation of requisite resources for IEC activities including awareness generation
and capacity building of stakeholders about the Scheme. The detailed planning for
the same should be submitted to the Centre and State/UT Government in advance
i.e., before the start of each season as prescribed in these Operational Guidelines.
6.2.5 Creation of a grievance redressal mechanism at the ground level covering the Sub-
district, District, State and National level, putting in place a robust and effective
method for grievance registration, handling, resolution, disposal and reporting etc.,
as referred in Para 30 of these Operational Guidelines.
6.2.6 Settlement of claims to the eligible farmers under the Basic Cover and all insured
add-on covers as per the prescribed timelines as defined in the seasonality discipline
and State/UT Notification.
6.2.7 Timely payment of service charge to Banks (4% of farmer's premium) and requisite
service charges to Common Service Centre - Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC-SPV)
& other Insurance Intermediaries through NCIP.
6.2.8 An SOP/Manual for carrying out different activities of awareness generation and
capacity building shall be as shared by the GoI separately.
6.2.9 Grievance redressal and resolution of complaints and queries of farmers raised
through any of the mode including Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline within timelines
outlined in the SOP/Manual of Grievance Redressal which shall be issued by the
GOI separately.
6.3 Banks and Other Enrolment Channels
Participation in implementation of the Scheme (PMFBY) will imply their acceptance of
all provisions, modalities and the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme. The
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
27

--- Page 28 ---
participating Banks, other channels like CSC, Insurance Intermediaries and
Insurance Companies must deploy requisite infrastructure and resources for
implementation of PMFBY particularly for following identified major activities:
6.3.1 Creation of digital credentials for each user at PACS, Branch, Regional/Zonal Office
and Head Office level and compulsory data entry of farmers' details on NCIP either
through fully automated mode using APIs or through manual mode as per the
prescribed enrolment module within the stipulated timelines as defined in the
Seasonality discipline. Specific SOP and manual for fully automated mode of data
exchange using APIs shall be released by the GoI separately.
6.3.2 Digitization of correct and updated information of the insured farmers on NCIP after
due validation with the records available with the bank/farmers including Aadhaar
Number, Mobile Number, validated land records and insured area, name of IUs,
Crops and Bank Account details etc.
6.3.3 Uploading copies of the requisite documents e.g. Land Possession/Ownership
Certificate, Copy of Bank Passbook/Bank Account details & Crop Sowing certificate
as per the requirements of the State Governments/UT Administrations, by all
channels except for the enrolments done through banks for loanee farmers.
6.3.4 Timely remittance of farmer's premium through payment gateway linked with NCIP
strictly as per timelines to implementing Insurance Companies.
6.3.5 Grievance redressal and resolution of complaints and queries of farmers raised
through any of the mode including Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline within timelines
outlined in the SOP/Manual of Grievance Redressal which shall be issued by the GoI
separately.
6.4 Submission of UID (AADHAAR) by Farmer
6.4.1 Aadhaar has been made mandatory for availing Crop insurance from Kharif
2017 season onwards. Therefore, all enrolment agencies are advised to
mandatorily obtain Aadhaar Number of their farmers.
6.4.2 Farmers not having Aadhaar Identity (ID) may also enroll under PMFBY subject to
their enrolment for Aadhaar and submission of proof of such enrolment as per
notification No. 334.dated 8th February 2017 issued by the GoI under Section 7 of
Aadhaar Act 2016 (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services). Copy of the notification may be perused on www.pmfby.gov.in. This may
be subject to further directions issued by the Government from time to time.
6.4.3 All enrolment agencies including banks have to compulsorily take Aadhaar/Aadhaar
enrolment number as per the notification under the Aadhaar Act before the enrollment
or sanction of crop loan under Kisan Credit Card. Hence the coverage of Loanee
farmers without Aadhaar shall not be allowed and such accounts need to be reviewed
and updated by the concerned bank branch regularly.
6.5 Agreement/Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between States and
Insurance Companies
6.5.1 State/UTs and Insurance Companies will enter into an agreement before the
commencement of the first crop season as per the model agreement shared by the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
28

--- Page 29 ---
GoI and as available on NCIP. The roles and responsibilities of the State/UTs (Para
38.2) and Insurance Companies (Para 38.4) and provision of performance evaluation
matrix and applicable penalties (Para 33) shall be a part of the Agreement/MoU
document necessarily.
7. Tendering and Notification
7.1 Procedure for Issuance of Tender by the States/UTs
7.1.1 Operational Guidelines of PMFBY provides for compulsory tender by the States/UTs
for period of 3 years to ensure assured business to Insurance Companies for a longer
duration leading to increased commitment towards infrastructure and manpower
deployment. State/UTs shall need to take a separate approval from the GoI in case
of tenders being called for less than 3 years period, else the GoI share of premium
shall not be released for the concerned State/UT for a tender of such short duration.
7.1.2 Updated Model Tender Document as per Operational Guidelines 2023 shall be
provided to the States/UTs by GoI separately.
7.1.3 Meeting of the SLCCCI should be convened prior to the commencement of the first
crop season and well in advance for finalizing the various terms and conditions and
calling of bids/issuance of the bid notice to all empaneled Insurance Companies for
selection to implement the Scheme during the risk period.
7.1.4 In order to have transparency, all the details mentioned in the Model Tender
Document (refer Para 7.1.2) shall mandatorily, be made a part of the tendering
process. No modification in the terms and conditions enumerated in the tender
document shall be allowed post tendering.
7.1.5 States / UTs should ensure the issuance of the tender notice/document and its
circulation to all concerned agencies/ departments/ institutions at least three months
prior to the commencement of the crop season incorporating all the essential details
about insured crops, areas, Sum Insured, Average Yield, Threshold Yield at IU level
for notified crops, opted risk cover, period of contract, bidder's evaluation and
selection methodology, premium rate for farmers, Government subsidy along with
seasonality discipline/ cut-off dates for each activity etc.
7.1.6 Annexure for bid document may be generated through the Portal including Crop-wise
IU location master. The procedure and template for the same are available on NCIP.
Before floating the Tender, last 10 years Average Yield data at the notified/available
level and Threshold Yield at notified unit along with other information /data should be
uploaded on the Portal in the prescribed template and should be made a part of the
Tender Document.
7.1.7 The prescribed list of data required to be published along with the tender is detailed
below to enable proper risk analysis and correct premium rating, viz. details about
the notified scheme, notified crops, level of notified IUs, crop-wise sum insured, crop-
wise indemnity level, crop-wise TY at IUs level for notified crops, desired risk
coverages (basic cover, add-on covers) etc.:
A. Details of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS), Automatic Rain Gauges (ARG) or
IMD/State Governments/UT Administrations/Private AWS/ARG networks, which
have been installed as per the standards and specifications defined in the WINDS
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
29

--- Page 30 ---
Manual 2023.
B. Year wise historical Average Yield data for each notified crop at the Notified IU level
for past 10 years (including immediately preceding season/year) and this data shall
be made available through the NCIP.
C. Year wise, Crop-wise, IU level historical Coverage and Claim data for past 3 years
(including immediately preceding season/year) and this data shall be made available
through the NCIP.
D. Crop-wise nomenclature of yield being collated and reported along with the
conversion factor between the two nomenclatures (if applicable) e.g. Paddy & Rice.
E. List of cluster wise distribution of districts and list of crops proposed to be covered
under different risk combinations along with applicable Sum Insured values,
indemnity levels and onset of sowing and harvesting dates.
F. Classification of irrigated and unirrigated districts in clusters as per irrigation facilities
available. If the State/UTs have not categorized irrigated/un-irrigated district, GoI
liability will be limited as per the data available/published by Directorate of Economics
& Statistics (DES), DA&FW and further revised from time to time.
G. Details of Alternate Risk Management Models (ARTM) and Yield Estimation Models
under YES-TECH as are being adopted by the State Governments/UTs.
7.1.8 Calculation of the lowest weighted premium of district shall be based on the
insured area for notified crops in each district during last year/season.
However, in the absence of insured area details of last year/season for all proposed
crops or any crop, immediately preceding year's available insured area will be
considered for calculation of the weighted premium of the district. Only this data will
be used for calculation of L1. For new notified crops, 30% of the average of the last
3 years net sown area, in case of major crops and 10% of the average of the last 3
years net sown area, in case of minor crops shall be considered as weights for the
calculation of lowest weighted premium of the district.
7.1.8.1 Bidding shall be done through e-tendering and work order may be released within
2 weeks of the opening of the Tender.
7.1.8.2 Depending on the risk profile, historical loss cost and cost benefit analysis for the
proposed crop(s) in district(s) of any cluster, if the State/UT Government feels that
the premium rate likely to be offered by the bidding Insurance Companies would be
abnormally high, then the State/UT Government can fix a ceiling on premium rates
for such crop(s) proposed to be included in the bidding evaluation for the bidding
period. However, recourse to this ceiling provision may be done only in well justified
cases and not as a general practice. The ceiling premium rate may be derived based
on statistical evaluation/actuarial premium analysis, loss cost analysis & historical
payouts etc. Further, the names of such crops should be disclosed by the State/UT
Government compulsorily in the tender document.
7.1.8.3 In such cases where a ceiling on premium rate has been indicated, the State/UT
Government must call financial bids in a two-step bidding or in two separate
envelopes. The first bid/envelope is for disclosing the premium rate offered by each
participating Insurance Company for such ceiling crops and must be categorized
under "Ceiling Premium Rate" and the 2nd bid envelop is for bidding of crop wise
premium rate for all other crops included in tender. Time interval for opening of both
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
30

--- Page 31 ---
bid/envelopes should be compulsorily mentioned in the bidding documents and
should preferably be on the same day. All participating insurance companies have to
submit the bid offer for both categories of crops as per the procedure mentioned
above.
7.1.9 The State/UT Government shall first evaluate the first envelope of the bid keeping in
view the premium offered by each individual participating Insurance Company and if
the risk propensity and weather susceptibility of the crop and/or historical claim/loss
data doesn't support the actuarial rates offered by the participating Insurance
Company, such crop(s) may be dropped from the list of proposed crops for
notification by the State/UT Government and evaluation for L1 bidder should be done
strictly based on the rates offered for remaining crops in the 2nd envelope. The
second envelope shall be opened by the State/UT Government only after the decision
on dropping the proposed crops/or accepting the premium rates offered by the
participating Insurance Company has been taken by the State/UT Government. If the
State/UT Government decides not to drop all the proposed crop(s)/ few crops for
which premium rate was obtained in a separate envelope of the "Ceiling Premium
Rate" from the bidding process, then L1 will be calculated by inclusion of the premium
offered for both categories of crops i.e., all remaining crops proposed to be covered.
7.1.10 Sum Insured and Indemnity Values for the current tender shall also be
uploaded by the State/UTs on NCIP before publishing of Tender. Loss Cost
calculation shall be made available for the State/UTs at District Crop & Cluster
level on the NCIP under State HQ Login Credentials for evaluation of the
premium rates within maximum 3 days of the opening of the tender bids.
7.1.11 The tender process is the most crucial part of the implementation of the scheme,
therefore it is important to ensure that the process is conducted with utmost caution
as the rates once opened may distort the future rates and participation of insurers
during the re-tendering process. Further the re-tendering without any valid reason not
only jeopardies the fairness and impartiality of the process but also becomes
prejudiced to the responsive & winning bidders. State/UTs therefore should avoid re-
tendering as a general practice. Re-tendering may be held only in exceptional
circumstances and only with the prior approval of GoI after submission of a request
with detailed reasons, except, in the cases where re-tendering is necessitated due to
inadequate participation of Insurance Companies as per the State/UT’s tender
evaluation norms. The GoI on its part will give its decision within 5 working days of
the receipt of such requests from the State/UTs.
7.1.12 State/UTs are required to compulsorily upload meeting notices, tender documents,
addendums, corrigendum, notification of award, copy of agreement between
State/UT Government and the Insurance Companies and all other requisite and
relevant data and information on the Document Management module of NCIP for
faster communication and response. Accordingly, the subsequent notifications,
circulars, directives shall also be uploaded on the Portal as and when issued for wider
reach and circulation.
7.1.13 All conditions proposed to be stipulated by State/UT Government shall be
incorporated in the bid document itself and no new condition should be included in
the notification. In case Insurance Companies have any objection to any Tender
condition which is in conflict with the guidelines, they can make a reference to the
State/UT Government with a copy to the GoI within 3 days of issuance of the Tender
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
31

--- Page 32 ---
Document.
7.1.14 L1 bidder shall not be allowed to withdraw its bid after opening of bids/allotment of
work. If L1 bidder withdraws then financial loss, if any, to the State/UT Government
due to re-tendering /assignment of work to others, due to increase in Actuarial
Premium Rate from previously declared L1 rate, shall be recovered from the
withdrawing L1 bidder. However, state shall issue work order within 2 weeks of
opening of bid.
7.1.15 There would be no further negotiations with the L1 bidder to accept L1 rates of other
bidder for any district-crop combination i.e., the rates quoted by the L1 bidder for
different district-crop combinations would be applicable within the given cluster.
7.1.16 Bidding and negotiation conditions will be as per Central Vigilance Commission
(CVC) guidelines, vide its circular nos. No.005/CRD/012 dated 03rd March 2007 &
No.005/CRD/012 dated 20th Jan 2010 and the Manual for Procurement of
Consultancy & Other Services (updated June 2022) and no State/UT level
modification of this clause shall be allowed.
7.1.17 Termination of Contract
7.1.17.1 Either party shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement under specific situations and
conditions as mentioned below after ninety (90) days of issuing a written notice to the
other party subject to the condition that if the notice is given within ninety (90) days
prior to commencement of a crop season, the said crop season would be
implemented fully by the concerned Insurance Company only except for the
conditions given below:
• The concerned Insurance Company is debarred/black-listed by the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) or GoI.
• The GoI may also examine the recommendation regarding black-listing of Insurance
Company by other competent authorities for taking appropriate
decision/compliance.
• The concerned Insurance Company has failed to maintain the required solvency
margin, or the solvency ratio for the financial year, as prescribed by IRDAI.
• The concerned Insurance Company has been de-empaneled by the GoI for the
implementation of a crop insurance scheme, as evidenced by the evaluation of
performance of Insurer conducted by the authority prior to the Bid Due Date.
• The State/UT Government and/or Insurer have failed to perform one's core
responsibility as prescribed in the Operational Guidelines including but not limited to
the payment of premium share by the State/UT Government and payment of claims
by the Insurer within the extended timelines.
• Any material changes in the scheme parameters and modalities of implementation
by the GoI.
7.1.17.2 Termination of agreement by any party due to any other reason not listed above will
attract an additional penalty of up to 5% of the total premium. The total premium in
this case shall be equal to the total estimated premium for the corresponding
remaining year/seasons of the agreement period.
7.2 Procedure for Issuance of Notification by the States/UTs
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
32

--- Page 33 ---
7.2.1 Notification of Crops, Areas and Implementing Agency (IA)
7.2.1.1 The Scheme shall operate on the principle of "Area Approach" in the selected
defined areas called IU. The State/UTs will notify crops and defined areas covered
during the season in accordance with the decision taken in the meeting of the
SLCCCI. The State/UTs should notify the Village/Village Panchayat or any other
equivalent unit as an IU for major crops defined at the District / Taluka or equivalent
level. For other crops, it may be a unit of size at or above the level of Village/Village
Panchayat depending on the availability of sufficient crop area for statistically sound
sampling for the conduct of CCEs. For defining a crop as a major crop and deciding
the IU level, the sown area of that crop should be at least 25% of the Gross Cropped
Area in a District/Taluka or equivalent level. And this should be appropriately
incorporated in the notification. The Notification should be issued for at least one
year at a time to facilitate banks for deduction of premium for a year and timely
data entry on NCIP.
7.2.1.2 The State/UTs will notify the type of Risk Coverage opted viz. Basic Cover and Add-
on Covers during the season. For the claims arising out of crop damage due to
localized risks and post-harvest losses, assessment of the crop damage shall be
made on an individual farm basis as outlined in Para 21, Para 21.5 and 21.6,
respectively.
7.2.1.3 The SLCCCI, for the purpose of notification, will consider factors such as availability
of the past yield data based on CCEs for adequate number of years (at least 10
years for the calculation of TY & Loss Cost), cropped acreage and capacity for
estimating yield during proposed season, etc. The State/UT Government should
endeavor to cover all the major crops grown in all the districts of the State/UT.
State/UTs should ensure that a standard methodology of yield estimation or
correlation of measurable weather parameters with yield/output exists for all the
crops proposed to be notified (refer Claim Calculation Methodology at Para 18,
19 & 21).
7.2.1.4 The States/UTs should provide all information and data as mentioned above (Para
7.1.6) in soft format (in Excel sheet) in English to the Insurance Companies for the
risk assessment, calculation of TY, Loss Cost & Premium Rates etc., at the IU level,
as detailed in the Model Tender Document and in its absence, the State/UT shall
provide the data at the next higher unit/nearest neighboring unit/weighted average
of contiguous units, as decided by the SLCCCI. The same data also shall be
entered/uploaded, approved and accepted by State/UTs and Insurance Companies
on the NCIP. The level and the name of a notified area of IU must be a part of the
notification and should be provided at the time of bidding itself. The historical yield
data (AY) & Threshold Data (TY) uploaded in NCIP shall be used by CPMU,
DA&FW, GoI for risk analysis, burn cost calculation and premium rating and shall be
considered as the only single source of truth.
7.2.1.5 In case State/UTs propose to notify irrigated and un-irrigated (rainfed) areas under
a crop separately, they shall ensure that minimum CCEs are planned and conducted
for irrigated and rainfed crops separately in such areas. In addition, past yield data
for requisite number of years will have to be made available separately for both. In
case village is the IU, for better representative sampling of CCEs and to avoid
moral hazard, notification of both irrigated and rainfed crops in the same IU
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
33

--- Page 34 ---
should be avoided.
7.2.1.6 While notifying the crop(s) where a specific conversion factor is being used for
reporting of yield such as in the case of rice/paddy etc., due care should be taken
by the State/UT Nodal Department to use the relevant specific nomenclature for
disclosure of Average Yield, Threshold Yield and Actual Yield while releasing the
tender document and submission of yield data and crop yield estimation data for the
calculation of admissible claims. The Insurance Company will also be responsible
for prior scrutiny of the Tender document for such details. Information/data provided
in the Tender document will be treated as final and in case of any error/
misreporting/disparity, the State/UT Government and the Insurance Company will
be equally liable for payment of additional claims, arising on account of it, if any, in
equal proportion.
7.2.1.7 For the current season or subsequent seasons (in a multi-year contract), the
State/UTs, if required, can notify additional IUs or de-notify certain IUs subject to
maximum deviation of 10% of the already notified IUs for the crop within a district at
the same premium rate, before the cut-off date for debit of premium. If the deviation
is >10% or in case of addition of a new crop, the actuarial premium rate may be
based on the calculation of weighted average premium rate as prevalent in
contiguous districts or by applying appropriate loading on the existing premium rate.
The rates for such crops will be determined /verified by the Central PMU and its
decision will be binding on both the State/UTs and the insurance companies.
7.2.1.8 In case of creation/re-organization of any new IU/Districts by the State
Governments/UT Administrations after the finalization of tender, it shall be included
in the scheme with the same terms and conditions as parent IU/Districts from the next
season within the contract period. In case an IU moves out of a district to be part of
another existing district then concurrently corresponding district (the district in which
IU is moving) rates will be applied. In case of formation of a district by re-organizing a
portion of more than one district then weighted average premium rate for each
notified crop will be determined by considering the last season's insured area for the
concerned part of district as weight.
7.2.1.9 The GoI shall incentivize each primary worker or field functionary involved in
conducting crop cutting experiment through CCE Agri App of GoI by Rs. 150
per CCE for encouraging using technology solutions and ensuring
transparency in the operationalization of Crop Yield Estimation process. The
SOP for conducting crop yield estimation through CCEs and modalities for
payment of incentives directly to the primary worker shall be shared by the
GoI separately.
7.3 Notification of Indemnity Level, Average Yield and Threshold Yield
7.3.1 Scheme provides for adoption of three levels of Indemnity, viz., 70%, 80% and 90%.
State/UT Government in consultation with the SLCCCI shall finalize the indemnity
levels for notified crops at the district level and the same shall be provided in the
tender document. The Threshold Yield shall be notified in the Tender for the current
season and the same will be used for claim calculation for that season. The Average
Yield of a notified crop in IU will be the average yield of the best five years out of the
last seven years. The Threshold Yield of the notified crop is equal to the Average
Yield multiplied by the Indemnity level. The Threshold Yield for any crop and IU,
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
34

--- Page 35 ---
as declared in the tender document issued by the State/UT, shall compulsorily
be part of the notification for the season/contract period and shall not change
at any point during that season/year/contract period.
7.3.2 The Indemnity level of the district-crop combination should be prescribed in the
tender and will remain the same during the entire contract period. In case of re-
organization/creation of new districts, similar provisions as detailed in Para 7.2.1.8
will be applicable. In case of formation of new district by re-organizing portions of
more than one existing districts, then weighted average indemnity level by
considering the last season area insured of each notified crop as weight with
rounding-off to the nearest Indemnity level defined under the Operational Guidelines
will be the applicable Indemnity level. This will be applicable for the tender duration
only.
7.3.3 The calculation and notification of Threshold Yield – For calculation of Threshold
Yield, historical average yield of the best five out of last seven years and applicable
indemnity level shall be considered. Further Threshold Yield should be defined only
at the notified IU level and once included in the notification issued by the State/UT, it
should not be changed at a later stage under any circumstances. In case of multi-
year contract, the Threshold Yield for the subsequent years shall be adopted
choosing one of the following methods for computation:
7.3.3.1 Fixed Threshold Yield – Threshold Yield as derived from the best 5 of the
immediate last 7 years crop yield data and notified indemnity level, will remain
unchanged for the entire contract period. The premium rates quoted by Insurance
Companies will remain unchanged for the entire contract period. It is described in the
Illustration 1 below:
Illustration 1: Fixed Threshold Yield
Assumption:
If past 7 years yield at Insurance unit level are as below:
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1,500 1,700 1,600 1,900 1,850 1,400 2,000
Threshold Yield:
Threshold Yield calculated as per formula below:
Formula = [(Ʃ Best 5-year Yield) X Notified Indemnity level] ÷ 5
Under this method the Threshold Yield calculated in year 1 will remain constant across IUs
during the entire contract period as illustrated in the table below:
Year 2020 2021 2022
Indemnity Level 70% 70% 70%
Threshold Yield 1,267 1,267 1,267
Premium Rate:
Under this method Premium rate quoted by The Insurance Company in first year will remain
same throughout the tender period. For example, if the premium rate quoted by
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
35

--- Page 36 ---
insurance company for a district crop combination is 13% and then it will remain 13%
for the entire contract period as illustrated in the table below:
Year 2020 2021 2022
Premium Rate 13% 13% 13%
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every Insurance Company will quote premium rate for each
district crop combination notified by concerned State/UT. L1 will be determined on
the basis of lowest weighted average premium rate considering last corresponding
season's area insured as weights for all crops combined for that cluster.
7.3.3.2 Laddered Threshold Yield - If the district level average change in yield for a crop
over immediately preceding 7 years is negative then fixed TY mentioned as in Para
7.3.3.1, above shall apply. Otherwise, immediately preceding 7 years district level
average growth rate in yield will be used to fix the Threshold Yield for each of the
subsequent two seasons of all concerned IUs for these seasons within the contract
period and same shall be pre-notified at the time of tender itself. Insurance Company
shall quote one rate of the premium for all the seasons accordingly. Lowest bid shall
be determined considering last year's insured area as detailed in Para 7.2. To ensure
clarity in the understanding, two illustrations 2 & 3 have been provided below:
*Note - District level average yield is a crop specific simple average of yields across
the IUs in a district. This exercise is to be performed for each crop notified in a district.
Illustration 2: Laddered TY- Negative growth rate in last 7 years yield
Assumptions
If last 7-year district level average yield of a crops notified is as:
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1,000 1,000 1,600 1,900 1,850 1,400 400
Indemnity Level-70%
Threshold Yield:
Here, average yield growth rate in last 7 years = - 3.27% as calculated below:
(1,000/1,000-1) + (1,600/1,000-1) + (1,900/1,600-1) + (1,850/1,900-1) + (1,400/1,850-1) +
(400/1,400)-1)]/6
In this case since average growth rate in last 7years yield is negative, Threshold Yield will
remain constant for the concerned crop across IUs, across the contract period as
below:
Year 2020 2021 2022
Indemnity Level 70% 70% 70%
Threshold Yield 1,085 1,085 1,085
Note1 - Yield for each Crop to be notified in a district needs evaluation and check
for its growth rate to set-up TYs for different years in a contract period.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
36

--- Page 37 ---
Note2 - Please note that TY needs to be calculated at IU level with the data
related to respective IUs.
Premium Rate:
It will remain same across the contract period like Illustration I.
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every insurance company will quote the premium rate for each
district crop combination notified by State/UT Government. L1 will be determined on
the basis of lowest weighted average rate considering last year insured area as
weight.
Illustration 3: Laddered TY- Positive growth rate in last 7 years yield
Assumptions
District level average yield considering yield of all crops notified is as below:
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1,000 1,000 1,600 1,900 1,850 1,400 1,200
Indemnity Level-70%
Method
Average Yield growth rate in last 7 years = 6.25% as calculated below:
(1,000/1,000-1) + (1,600/1,000-1) + (1,900/1,600-1) + (1,850/1,900-1) + (1,400/1,850-1)
+ (1,200/1,400)-1)]/6
In this case since average growth rate in last 7-years yield is positive (6.25%). Threshold yield
of each IU for that crop will vary with the same growth rate as below:
Year 2020 2021 2022
Indemnity Level 70% 70% 70%
Threshold Yield 1,113 1,183 1,257
Note1- Yield for each Crop to be notified in a district needs evaluation and check for
its growth rate to set-up TYs for different years in a contract period. There may be a
case that some crops in a district will have constant TY (as shown in illustration
II) and some stepped- up TY as shown in illustration III.
Note2- Please note that first year TY (of a crop) needs to be calculated at IU level
with data related to respective IUs. IInd and IIIrd year TY of different IUs need to be
calculated with incorporation of TY growth rate as explained above.
Note3- Yield growth rate in preceding 7 years must be considered up to 2 decimal
places.
Premium Rate:
It will remain same across the contract period like Illustration I.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
37

--- Page 38 ---
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every IC will quote the premium rate for each district crop
combination notified by the State Governments/UT Administrations. L1 will be
determined as the company having lowest weighted average rate considering last
year insured area as weight.
7.3.3.3 Variable Threshold Yield - In this case, Threshold Yield of a crop in an IU may be
computed every year after incorporating the actual crop yield of the previous year.
For premium rate determination, increase/decrease in Threshold Yield will be
determined by considering district level weighted average yield (assuming last year
insured area as weight) of a crop. The premium rate shall be increased/ decreased
as per mechanism detailed in the table below:
Corresponding Increase/ Decrease in APR against each 1% point Increase/Decrease in
APR Grid Indemnity Level
Premium Range 70% 80% 90%
0%<=APR<5% 4.65% 5.80% 6.90%
5%<=APR<10% 2.80% 3.45% 4.15%
10%<=APR<15% 1.70% 2.10% 2.50%
15%<=APR<20% 1.20% 1.50% 1.75%
20%<=APR<25% 0.95% 1.15% 1.40%
25%<=APR<30% 0.75% 0.95% 1.15%
APR>=30% 0.65% 0.80% 0.95%
In case of extreme circumstances wherein application of prescribed change
in rates as above results in negative premium rate, the Central PMU will work
out the rates. Worked-out rates after the approval of GoI will be acceptable to
all concerned stakeholders.
Illustration 4: Variable TY
Assumptions
District level weighted average yield (last year's area insured as weight) of a notified crop
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Yield 1,500 1,700 1,600 1,800 1,850 1,400 1,500
Indemnity Level =70%
Premium rate quoted by L1 Insurance Company for a district crop combination =13%
Year 2020 TY (Notional at district level) is calculated as per existing formula (using data given
in 1st assumption) and TY for year 2021 and year 2022 are just assumed for
illustration.
Year 2020 2021 2022
Threshold Yield 1,183 1,225 1,155
Method
Growth in District level Threshold Yield:
Year 1: 0%
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
38

--- Page 39 ---
Year 2: 1,225 / 1,183 - 1 = 3.55%
Year 3: 1,155 / 1,183 - 1 = -2.37%
Note: In year 1 there would not be any change in TY as it will be known to insurance
company during tender process.
Variation in Premium Rate:
Year 1 =13%
Year 2 = 13%*(1+(3.55*1.7%)) = 13.78%
Year 3 = 13%*(1+(-2.37*1.7%)) = 12.48%
Note1 - Please note that district level Threshold yield has been calculated notionally
to calculate changes in Actuarial Premium Rate (as premium rates are quoted at
district level) and have no other relevance.
Note2 - Since premium rate is quoted for each district-crop combination, the above
exercise needs to be performed for all the crops notified in a district.
Evaluation of tender process and determination of L1 Company:
Under this method, every insurance company will quote premium rate for each
district-crop combination notified by State/UT Government. L1 will be determined as
company having lowest weighted average rate considering last year’s area insured
as weight.
Actual Premium Rate (APR)
Note1 - Please note that the threshold yield may vary at IU level but for premium
rate determination, weighted average yield (considering the last year insured area
as weight) at the district level for respective crops will be considered.
Note2 - These factors of increase/decrease have been ascertained independent of
crop /region and reflect the country level impact due to changes in threshold yield.
There may be different levels of impact on burn cost at the district/regional level due
to variations in threshold yield, however, to simplify and considering the ease of
implementation, it has been standardized.
In this case the State/UTs would have to provide IU level crop yield data well in
advance so that the revised Threshold Yield and premium rate could be calculated
and notified before starting of the new season.
In case of unavailability of latest season yield data, the prior season yield data
can be used for pricing, however, base Threshold Yield will not be allowed to
be changed even if the latest data is made available post tender conclusion.
While adopting any one of above three methods, the following assumptions and
limitation of these methods may be taken note of:
i. Model using past data may not be a true reflection of future events.
ii. Standardized rates prescribed above may not exactly reflect the risks inherent in
specific district crop combination.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
39

--- Page 40 ---
iii. This model is subjected to spurious accuracy in certain cases.
iv. Increase/ Decrease in threshold yield is being tested at the district level, but
threshold yield can vary at the IU level and therefore have an element of
approximation.
v. Increase/ Decrease in rates is calculated by the expected loss ratio of 80%.
vi. As with all statistical/mathematical models, this method is also subject to modelling
error.
vii. Prescribed changes in premium rate are calculated considering mid-point of each
APR range band except in 0-5% range wherein it is calculated at 4.5%.
viii. This model assumes normality in yield data and therefore subject to an element of
error in case of departure from normality.
7.3.4 In exceptional cases, where the last corresponding season yield data is not available
at the time of Bidding, yield data is to be provided before the harvesting of the current
season. However, the yield data up to last-to-last corresponding season should be
provided at the time of bidding itself. In such cases admissible claims will be anyway
calculated on the basis of Average Yield and Threshold Yield values calculated on
the basis of data available at the time of bidding.
7.4 Notification of Sum Insured
The State/UTs need to choose either the Scale of Finance or Notional Average
Value (Notional Average Yield X Minimum Selling Price (MSP) / Farm Gate Price)
(Farm gate price will be considered for the other crops for which MSP is not
declared) method for calculation of Sum Insured for a district-crop combination for
the entire period of contract. The crop-wise sum insured notified in the first
year/season could be changed in the subsequent year/season as per the change in
the Scale of finance or the MSP/ Farm gate price as available for the notified crop
and decided upon by the State. However, change in the sum insured over a year
due to the change in the Scale of Finance/farm gate price will be capped at 10%
every year. In case of increase in Sum Insured beyond 10%, consent from the
concerned Insurance Company and approval from GoI shall be mandatory to obtain.
7.5 Notification of Seasonality Discipline
State/UTs in accordance with the broad seasonality defined/prescribed in these
Operational Guidelines shall also notify the seasonality discipline for various
activities under the Scheme viz. submission of insurance proposals/application,
consolidated declarations by banks, remittance of premium to Insurance
Companies, uploading of individual covered farmer's data on NCIP, Tagging of
applications as paid, Approval, Rejection or Reversion of applications by Insurance
Companies, Re-submission of reverted applications by Insurance Intermediaries &
CSC-VLEs etc., crop damage assessment for (i) standing crop (ii) localized
calamities, (iii) prevented sowing, (iv) post-harvest losses, (v) On-Account payment
for major calamities, conducting & monitoring of CCEs for crop yield estimation using
mobile app, uploading of yield data on NCIP and settlement of claims by Insurance
Companies using DigiClaim Module of NCIP etc., as per the provisions of the
scheme guidelines.
7.6 Weather Information Network Data System (WINDS)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
40

--- Page 41 ---
7.6.1 GoI intends to set up a nationwide network of Automatic Weather Stations
(AWS)/Automatic Rain Gauges (ARG) under the WINDS initiative which shall
augment the weather data collection system in the country in terms of adequacy of
network, data collection, data standardization, data hosting and dissemination
thorough coordinated efforts with IMD, State/UTs and Public/Private technical
organizations.
7.6.2 The GoI, constituted a committee for wider stakeholder consultations with a mandate
to prepare a comprehensive document for nationwide implementation,
standardization and improvement of weather data infrastructure, and development
of WINDS Portal.
7.6.3 Accordingly, the committee has prepared a comprehensive WINDS Manual 2023,
which includes the Model Tender Document and the Agreement, in consultation with
all the stakeholders comprising of representatives from India Meteorological
Department (IMD), State Governments/UT Administrations, MoA&FW Officials,
Insurance Companies, Reinsurers, National & State Remote Sensing Application
Centers and various technical agencies involved in providing weather data services
across the country.
7.6.4 The GoI has accordingly notified the WINDS Manual 2023 for its implementation and
the same shall be followed by the State/UTs and other stakeholders for setting up
AWS/ARGs under WINDS.
7.6.5 WINDS shall facilitate the establishment of a full-fledged AWS at Block/Tehsil/Taluk
level and ARG at Gram Panchayat (GP) level. This network shall foster development
of “One Nation, One Pipeline” for hyper-local weather data for all purposes related
to agriculture and disaster risk mitigation in the country.
7.6.6 The State/UT shall establish the WINDS Network by calling tenders from the WINDS
Implementation Partners (WIPs) empaneled by the WINDS committee for the
purpose and shall notify the WINDS network as a source of certified weather data
for settling claims under RWBCIS. Further the weather parameters shall be used for
generating proxy indicators for applicable perils under PMFBY and for any other
parameterized crop/disaster risk insurance schemes notified by the respective
Central/State Governments/UT Administrations under SARTHI Platform framework.
The weather data from this network shall also be used for the purpose of generating
technology-based yield estimates as envisaged under YES-TECH Manual 2023.
7.6.7 Only those AWS/ARGs of IMD/State Governments/UT Administrations /private
agencies should be considered and notified which are as per standards and
specifications outlined in the WINDS Manual 2023, as amended from time to time.
This network of AWS and ARGs shall be optimally operational and be able to provide
real time weather data on WINDS Portal.
7.6.8 The GoI, through WINDS Manual 2023, has envisaged to operationalize AWS/ARG
network under WINDS with private player participation on the basis of 'renting of
data' i.e., final payment shall be linked to the data received at the WINDS portal,
maintained by the GoI. Data generated at AWS/ARGs under WINDS shall be directly
sent from data logger to the WINDS portal as per the data and information sharing
policy defined in WINDS Manual 2023.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
41

--- Page 42 ---
7.6.9 The State/UT shall notify the AWS and ARGs for consideration of weather data for
generating the proxy indicators for initiating crop damage surveys under add-on
claim and for assessing the extent of crop losses and computation of claims under
RWBCIS. The weather data from WINDS will also be used for dispute resolution and
calculation of synthetic yield data in case of failure to get applicable weighted
component of Crop Yield estimation data arrived through CCEs for generating final
yield data.
7.6.10 The cost of implementing the WINDS component would be shared between Central
and State Governments/UT Administrations on sunset basis as under:
Sharing Ratio/Pattern between Central and State
Governments/UT Administrations for YES-TECH
SN Particulars
2024-25 2025-26 2026-27
2027 Onwards
(1st Year) (2nd Year) (3rd Year)
North-eastern
As per premium sharing pattern
1 and Himalayan 90:10 90:10 90:10
between the Centre and the State
States/UTs
Governments/UT Administrations
2. Other States/UTs 90:10 80:20 60:40
7.6.11 The GoI and the State Governments/UT Administrations shall have the liberty to use
the data generated under WINDS for public purposes, including but not limited to,
implementation of welfare and development schemes, research and development,
weather/agro-meteorological advisory, disaster management or for any other
purpose involving larger public interest through Central/State/UT Government
bodies or any other public institution including IMD, etc.
7.6.12 The WINDS Implementation Partners (WIPs) can explore the commercial potential
of the weather data generated through AWS/ARG network installed and maintained
by them under WINDS. However, the WIPs shall not provide any data to any entity
specifically restrained by the GoI. Further, data of stations/area notified by IMD or
any other Government body as classified, shall also not be shared by the WIPs. The
same shall be described in the data and information sharing policy of WINDS, to be
notified separately by the WINDS Committee.
7.6.13 The WINDS data shared by GoI with any entity shall not be used for any other
purpose or shared with any third party or monetized by such entities.
7.6.14 The weather data generated through AWS/ARG network under WINDS shall be
hosted on an access-controlled WINDS portal and shall be shared with the
concerned stakeholders, free of cost, as per the data and information sharing policy
of WINDS, to be notified separately by the WINDS Committee.
8. Engagement of Common Service Centers (CSCs) and Other
Intermediaries for Coverage of Non-Loanee Farmers
8.1 The CSC e-Gov India Ltd., a company established under Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology (MeITY), has been engaged to enroll non-loanee farmers
through their network of common service centers (CSCs) manned by Village Level
Entrepreneurs (VLEs) across almost all Gram Panchayats of the country. CSC e-
Gov will act as a nodal agency for engagement with the GoI, the State
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
42

--- Page 43 ---
Governments/UT Administrations and Insurance Companies for providing farmers’
enrollment and related services under PMFBY.
8.2 All empaneled Insurance Companies shall compulsorily be required to enter into an
agreement with CSC e-Gov for the enrolment of non-loanee farmers and for the
provision of other related services to farmers under the purview of PMFBY and also
pay service charges.
8.3 All applications of one unique farmer of one village for a particular season and
Scheme to be considered as one unit for the payment of service charges. No other
agreement or payment is required to be made for this purpose. Transactions having
identical Farmer’s ID with same village name and same CSC-ID will be considered
as duplicate transaction. In such cases payment to CSC-e-Gov will be made only
once. No service charge shall be payable on rejected applications. However, the
Insurance Companies shall act on all such applications within 15 days from the
finalization of enrollment data as per timelines mentioned in the seasonality
discipline of Operational Guidelines.
8.4 No charges/fee shall be borne or paid by the farmers being enrolled through CSC-
VLEs, i.e., Common Service Centre - Village Level Entrepreneur (CSC-VLE). This
information should prominently be displayed by the concerned CSC-VLEs on their
notice board, clearly visible by all visitors. State may take strict action including
suitable proceeding under law against any CSC-VLE charging any fees from the
farmers for enrolling them under the scheme.
8.5 Any payment deducted from the wallet of CSC-VLE against the PMFBY/RWBCIS
policies cannot be refunded without reconciliation of applications and corresponding
data at NCIP and transaction statement generated by payment gateway provider.
The amount received against the successful applications on NCIP will be transferred
to the concerned Insurance Company the next day of the transaction (T+1).
Difference between the amount received by CSC-eGov on day T and the amount
pertaining to successful applications (day T) will be reconciled within next 7 days.
Delay in remitting the aforesaid premium amount beyond 7 days will attract a penal
interest as decided by the GoI based on the default period.
8.6 While accepting the application from the individual farmers CSC-VLE will explain the
provisions and requirement of documents along with consequences of wrong
submission of information/documents to the farmers and further take due care that all
the documents submitted by farmers are properly scrutinized, verified and uploaded
on NCIP in legible form to avoid any anomaly in the coverage of that particular farmer
by the Insurance Company. In order to avoid application rejection, the following
approach/time-line shall be followed:
i. The insurance companies on finding any deficiency in the application during the
quality check, shall revert the application with all observations in one go to the CSC-
VLE within 15 days from the cut-off date for data entry by CSC-VLE on NCIP.
Subsequent observations and reversion of already reverted and rectified
applications shall not be allowed from NCIP.
ii. The CSC-VLE shall immediately take action for the rectification of all the
observations given by the concerned Insurer in one go within next 7 days and re-
submit the applications back to the Insurance Companies.
iii. In case VLE is not able to rectify or submit the revised documents they shall return
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
43

--- Page 44 ---
such applications also within 7 days indicating their remarks.
iv. Under no circumstances, the reverted applications shall be kept on hold and
unresolved by the CSC-VLE after 7 days.
v. The insurance companies will have to finalize the status of the applications within
the timeline stipulated in Table 2 of the Para 16.4 indicating seasonality discipline.
Insurance Companies shall not be able to revert again the application for any other
fresh reason which was not given in first attempt and shall also not reject such
application without prior approval of the State/UT Government and the GoI.
vi. All rejected applications may be re-opened for review & verification if the State/UT
Government and/or GoI decides to do so.
8.7 As per the IRDAI circular, no separate qualification/certification will be required for
the CSC-VLEs to facilitate enrolment of non-loanee farmers. However, proper
training/ capacity building program should be arranged for them by the CSC e-Gov
with support from concerned Insurance Companies and State Governments/UT
Administrations.
8.8 The Banking Correspondent (BC) associated with the designated branches of the
rural financial institutions including the public sector banks financing
KCC/Agriculture short-term loans at subsidized interest rate are also authorized to
collect the applications/premium from the desirous non-loanee farmers, similarly to
CSC-VLE, using the digital platform of the concerned banks or AIDE App for the
same. Creation of login credential on the NCIP and approval of such eligible BCs
should compulsorily be done by the branch head of the concerned bank branches.
The activities including undertaking of business by such BCs are to be monitored by
the bank branches and responsibility of irregularities if any will lie with the concerned
bank. Other designated enrolment intermediaries may be empaneled and linked with
the NCIP in due course as and when such new channels are approved by the GoI
for the enrolment of farmers.
8.9 Empaneled Insurance Companies have to necessarily register/approve all licensed
insurance intermediaries desirous of getting engaged for enrolment of non-loanee
farmers in the beginning of each season within 7 days of the award of work in the
State/UT on NCIP and submit the list and details of such intermediaries to the
concerned Nodal department of the State/UT Government. Further all intermediaries
have to work strictly as per the provisions of the Scheme guidelines and IRDAI
regulations.
9. Electronic Remittance of Funds
9.1 The GoI has already been leveraging the capabilities of Public Financial
Management System (PFMS) for remittance of premium subsidies to concerned
Insurance Companies and eligible claims directly into farmer’s Bank account, KCC
or Saving Account or in Aadhaar linked bank accounts. Similarly, all the State
Governments/UT Administrations shall also endeavor to utilize Public Financial
Management System (PFMS)/PFMS linked systems to remit the funds to the
Insurance Companies and other agencies under PMFBY to ensure transparency
and authenticity in the financial transactions.
9.2 Banks, CSC e-GOV and other Insurance intermediaries are required to remit the
consolidated premium payment to respective Insurance Companies mandatorily
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
44

--- Page 45 ---
through the Payment gateway of NCIP or payment challan generated through NCIP
within the stipulated timelines. The remittance of the premium shall compulsorily be
done within the cut-off date stipulated for the respective enrolment channels. Bank
details of Insurance Companies have already been made available on the NCIP, the
payment gateway and PFMS itself. The applicable service charges for remittance of
premium amount through payment gateway shall be borne by the payer i.e. Banks,
CSC e-Gov, Insurance Intermediaries, and Farmers enrolling themselves through
NCIP. Presently, the payment gateway charges are Rs 5/- + applicable GST (i.e.
Rs. 5.90/-) per transaction.
9.3 To adjust the variance in the remitted premium due to rounding off by the banks and
the Insurance intermediaries to the respective Insurance Companies through the
payment gateway of the NCIP, no action is required if this amount is plus/minus Rs.
10/-. However, if the amount exceeds Rs. 10/- then the banks and the Insurance
Intermediaries shall be allowed to remit a maximum amount of Rs. 100/- to the
respective Insurance Companies through the payment gateway of the NCIP in order
to cover the aforesaid shortfall, beyond the stipulated premium remittance cut-off
date up to the cut-off date for application reconciliation.
9.4 All Insurance Companies will maintain only one bank account for crop insurance
business throughout the Country for premium credit including farmers’ share, state
share and central share of subsidy from all concerned stakeholders. This amount
will only be used for premium deposit purpose for PMFBY/RWBCIS and no other
money can be credited to this account. The Insurance Companies will reconcile the
account statement with the transaction statement issued by the payment gateway
for premium remittance and PFMS/NCIP transaction statement for claim remittance
and submit monthly declarations for each month regarding pendency of premium
receipt and claim remittance along with the reasons thereof to the GoI. No remittance
or financial transaction in the form of Banker's cheque or Demand Draft or any other
non-electronic mode shall be allowed.
9.5 The Insurance Companies have been provided with login access of NCIP for sharing
essential crop notification data and information along with application-level coverage
data including banking details of individual farmers on the NCIP, for doing the
necessary data reconciliation, verification & validation, claim intimation, calculation
of payable claims and remit the same directly into pre-declared bank accounts linked
to the NCIP through PFMS.
9.6 Insurance Companies shall complete all verification and validation of coverage
details of farmers for the given season within the timelines as stipulated in the
seasonality discipline of the operational guidelines mandatorily before the initiation
of claim settlement. The Insurance Companies shall not be allowed to initiate
separate verification process of any kind at the time of payment of claims and delay
the claim settlement to the beneficiary farmers. As the requisite details such as
Aadhaar number, land record and crop details, address etc. have been captured at
the time of enrolment itself and accordingly Insurance Companies are expected to
complete the verification within given timelines.
9.7 Govt. of India is developing a Digital Public Infrastructure in the country to
interconnect various digital databased spread across various States/UTs and other
public & private entities across the country and globally also for leveraging various
digital capabilities to increase the efficiency and service delivery across various
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
45

--- Page 46 ---
farmer welfare schemes being run by the Central Govt. & State Governments/UT
Administrations. One of these DPIs i.e. Agri-Stack which captures and maintains
farmer registry, crop sown registry, and geo-referenced village maps. For effective
and efficient management of PMFBY, the DA&FW will rely on the data sharing
mechanism or Agri-Stack. The relevant data pertinent to implementation of scheme
shall be consumed electronically (using open API) for the purposes of beneficiary
identification, verification, benefit delivery and monitoring, pertaining to the States.
Districts, villages where these data are available. The information as and when
collected and collated in the Farmers registry, land record validation, digital crop
surveys, and geo-referenced village maps shall be used for implementation of this
scheme.
9.8 Going forward the verification and validation of coverage under the scheme shall be
done using the pre-validated data of Farmer, Land Records & Crop details available
through Agri-Stack. The data available from Agri-Stack shall have precedence on
the data entered into NCIP by the enrollment channels. The acceptance of data
coming from these platforms shall be binding on all stakeholders under the scheme
and shall be considered for finalization of applications for insurance coverage. This
shall come into force from the date of notification of Agri-Stack by Govt. of India. A
detailed SOP with operational modalities including exception handling owing to
difference between data entered on NCIP and validated data received from Agri-
stack shall be notified by the GoI separately.
9.9 Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AEPS) shall be used mandatorily as primary
mode of payment of claims for the applications enrolled as non-loanee applications,
whereas NEFT based remittance of claims shall be used as a primary mode for claim
settlement for the applications enrolled for loanee farmers
10. Census Code Mapping of Entities
10.1 All State/UTs shall update census codes of their villages with the higher
administrative/revenue units like Gram Panchayat, Firkas, Patwar Circles, Revenue
Circles, Hoblis, Mandals, Blocks, Tehsils, Talukas, Districts as well as of Automatic
Weather Stations/Backup Weather Stations. Only Revenue or LGD classification of
locations has been used in NCIP and accordingly the same shall be considered for
creation and revision of location masters in NCIP. This will create a standard
mechanism of mapping and identification across the country.
10.2 States/UTs are required to adopt the Revenue Hierarchical System under PMFBY
and RWBCIS and accordingly shall update the village master to facilitate notification
on portal. The State/UTs shall ensure that the notification of Hierarchical System
should be same as that of the location master of revenue or LGD system to facilitate
the uniform database for further reporting and analysis.
10.3 GoI has procured village boundary maps from Survey of India. Further, for the
purposes of obtaining updated and accurate farm location State/UTs must also
provide Geo-coded (latitude & longitude) land parcel based cadastral maps and
village shape maps in digital format for generation of SST points, setting up network
of AWS and ARGs under WINDS, operationalization of YES-TECH and integration
with other Apps like CCE Agri App, CROPIC App, AIDE App, Crop Loss Assessment
App etc.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
46

--- Page 47 ---
11. Digitization of Land Records
11.1 Under the Central Sector Scheme of Digital India Land Record Modernization
Program (DILRMP), majority of the State/UTs have digitized their land records. To
address the problems of over insurance and acreage discrepancy, State/UTs are
strongly advised to integrate their digitized land records with the NCIP so that the
individual land records of farmers can be accessed through the NCIP for crop
insurance and the insured area be validated. This will help the Government to reach
and identify individual beneficiaries and bring utmost transparency and authenticity
in providing scheme benefits to the genuine beneficiaries as per their eligibility
norms in the right spirits of provisions of the Operational Guidelines.
12. Sum Insured/Coverage Limit
12.1 States/UTs need to choose either the Scale of Finance or Notional Average Value
(Notional Average Yield * MSP/Farm Gate) price method for computation of Sum
Insured for a district-crop combination for the entire period of the contract. The crop-
wise sum insured notified in the first year/season could be changed in the
subsequent year/season as per the change in the Scale of finance or MSP/ Farm
gate price as available for the notified crop and decided upon by the State. However,
any change in the sum insured over a year due to changes in the scale of
finance/farm gate price will be capped at 10% within the contract period. The sum
Insured for individual farmer is equal to the Scale of finance or Notional Average
Value (NAY x MSP/Farm Gate Price) per hectare multiplied by the insured area of
the notified crop proposed by the farmer for insurance.
12.2 Area under cultivation shall always be expressed in Hectare for all crops including
perennial horticulture crops, accordingly the State Governments/UT Administrations
are required to mandatorily notify the applicable premium and sum insured values
at Per Hectare basis rather than per plant basis.
12.3 In cases where crops are separately notified under irrigated, rainfed category by the
States/UTs, the Sum Insured value for irrigated and rainfed areas should be
separately indicated and notified.
13. Premium Rates and Premium Subsidy
13.1 The Actuarial Premium Rate (APR) would be charged under PMFBY& RWBCIS by
the implementing Insurance Company. The rate of premium payable by the farmer
will be as per the following Table 1:
Maximum Premium Rate payable
Season Crops by farmer
(% of Sum Insured)*
All Food grain and Oilseeds crops
2.0% of SI or Actuarial rate,
Kharif (all Cereals, Millets, Pulses and
whichever is less
Oilseeds crops)
All Food grain and Oilseeds crops
1.5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
Rabi (all Cereals, Millets, Pulses and
whichever is less
Oilseeds crops)
Annual Commercial/ Annual 5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
Kharif and Rabi Horticultural crops whichever is less
Perennial horticultural / commercial 5% of SI or Actuarial rate,
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
47

--- Page 48 ---
crops (pilot basis) whichever is less
*Note: Premium paid by non-loanee farmers should be rounded off to nearest Rupee.
Payment of Government Subsidy
All farmers enrolled under the scheme would be entitled for admissible subsidy on the
Actuarial Premium. All demands for premium subsidies shall be mandatorily routed
through the NCIP by the Insurance Companies and paid through PFMS system by
the GoI.
13.1.1 The difference between Actuarial Premium Rate (APR) and the Rate of Insurance
premium payable by farmers shall be treated as the Rate of Normal Premium
Subsidy, which shall be shared equally in 50:50 ratio by the Centre and State/UTs
in all State/UTs except Himalayan & North Eastern Region (NER) State/UTs where
subsidy sharing pattern between the Centre and State/UTs shall be in the 90:10
ratio.
13.1.2 The full GoI share in the premium subsidy as per sharing pattern in Para 13.1.1
above will be applicable only up to APR of 25% and 30% with respect to irrigated
and rainfed areas/district, respectively. For APR beyond those rates, GoI share of
subsidy will be limited to the applicable share up to the APR of 25% & 30% for each
notified crops in irrigated and rainfed districts respectively. The applicability of APR
for irrigated/unirrigated districts will be on the basis of the district-wise irrigated data
submitted by the State/UT Government in the Tender Document and Notification. In
case of the same is not submitted by the concerned State/UTs, the data published
by Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DES), DA&FW as revised from time to
time shall be used.
13.1.3 For the purpose of categorization of Districts between Rainfed and Irrigated, districts
having 50% or more of the Gross irrigated area will be categorized as Irrigated.
13.1.4 The State/ UTs are free to extend additional subsidy to reduce the financial burden
on farmers.
13.1.5 share over and above the normal subsidy from their budget. In other words,
additional subsidy, if any shall be borne entirely by the State/ UT. Subsidy in
premium is allowed only to the extent of notified Sum Insured excluding the Sum
Insured for the add-on covers for which GoI subsidy is not payable.
13.1.6 The Government premium subsidy to the implementing Insurance Companies shall
be routed through a Central Nodal Agency (CNA) designated by the GoI for the
purpose, strictly as per the provisions of the Operational Guidelines and modalities
prescribed by the GoI. Accordingly, the designated CNA is empowered to call and
collect all requisite information related to implementation of the Scheme and
utilization of Government funds and to share the same with the GoI for better
planning, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme. The premium subsidy will
be routed through PFMS/PFMS linked systems strictly based on the data hosed on
NCIP for the concerned season/state & cluster.
13.1.7 Governments, both Centre and State, shall release their share of subsidy as outlined
in Para 6.1.6 of these guidelines. The release of GoI subsidy shall not be dependent
on release of State subsidy for all seasons covered under the scheme including past
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
48

--- Page 49 ---
seasons. However, the Insurance Companies may continue to raise simultaneous
demands for State/UT and GoI share for each State/UT and season separately.
13.1.8 Both Centre and State Governments/UT Administrations, will release their share of
advance subsidy (First Instalment) equivalent to 50% of respective share of subsidy
in corresponding previous season to the Insurance Company if the demand is raised
for the same by Insurance Company before the opening of NCIP for enrolments. In
case the demand is submitted after the NCIP is opened for enrolments for the current
season, the advance subsidy equivalent to 50% of respective share of subsidy as
per paid applications for the current season shall be remitted subject to fulfilment of
General Financial Rule (GFR)/guidelines in the matter without waiting for coverage
details for the ongoing season. Subsequent tranches of subsidy share shall be
released based on approved applications for the season subject to submission of
demand for the same through NCIP. The Detailed process is given at Para 6.1.7 of
these guidelines.
13.1.9 In the State/UT who have adopted full or preferential universalization by subsiding
the Farmer share of premium also, the submission of demand for full farmer-share
to be paid by the State/UT Government for the season shall also be mandatorily
routed by the concerned insurance companies through NCIP on the basis of paid
applications for the season and state.
13.1.10 To facilitate claim settlement under risks of Prevented Sowing/ Mid-Season
Adversity/Localized Calamity: Insurance Companies should release the admissible
claim amount to the beneficiary immediately after receipt of farmers premium and
advance subsidy (1st Instalment) and without waiting for release of final subsidy
(2nd Instalment) from Government. The total premium required in respect of affected
IUs including subsidy to enable settlement of claims arising due to above events in
respect of all such beneficiaries shall be adjusted from the fund already available
with Insurance Companies as advance upfront subsidy (1st Instalment) to facilitate
compliance with Section 64VB of Insurance Act/Regulation of IRDAI.
13.1.11 All admissible claims based on Yield data/Post harvest losses will be settled on
receipt of second instalment of Government subsidy to be paid on the basis of
approved applications as available on the NCIP subject to submission of demand
for the same by Insurance Companies through NCIP. The remaining Government
subsidy, if any will be paid after reconciliation of all business statistics for the season
on NCIP and only after the period specified for auto-approval of applications in the
seasonality discipline outlines in the Operational Guidelines subject to submission
of demand by the concerned Insurance Companies through the NCIP.
13.1.12 All empaneled Insurance Companies including private Insurance Companies shall
provide free access to the Central and State level agencies including Comptroller &
Auditor General (CAG) and its authorized agencies to verify the accounts and
inspect the data and documents in respect to the implementation of
PMFBY/RWBCIS.
13.1.13 In case, the State/UT Government is willing to subsidize full farmers' share of
premium, a token farmer Premium of minimum Re. 1 should compulsorily be
charged per application from the farmer to facilitate electronic tracking, enrolment
validations & reconciliation.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
49

--- Page 50 ---
13.1.14 Enrolment on the NCIP for any season shall be opened only after the conditions
outlined in Para 6.1.7 for submission of advance premium in Escrow accounts are
fulfilled. However, the State/UTs shall not be allowed to implement the Scheme in
subsequent seasons (at least two seasons) in case of considerable delay by
State/UTs in release of requisite subsequent tranches of Premium Subsidy to
concerned Insurance Companies beyond a prescribed time limit. Cut-off dates for
invoking this provision for Kharif and Rabi seasons will be 31st March and 30th
September of succeeding year respectively. However, State/UT shall have to pay a
penalty @ interest rate of 12% per annum beyond three months of prescribed cut-
off date for release of subsidy which shall be deposited in the Escrow Account
maintained for the purpose.
14. Budget for Administrative Expenses
14.1 Up to 3% of the total budget for PMFBY/RWBCIS shall be mandatorily earmarked
by State/UTs for creating funds for enabling administrative expenses towards
implementation and monitoring of the Scheme including setting up of State PMUs,
creating better implementation infrastructure, Monitoring and deployment of IEC &
capacity building activities, expenditure towards yield estimation through CCEs &
YES-TECH and crop health monitoring, crop damage/loss assessment expenses,
setting up of AWS/ARGs under WINDS, adoption of new technologies and fostering
innovation, travelling and creating contingency fund etc.
14.2 The GoI has already made provisions for aforesaid activities under sub heads like
Salaries, Domestic Travel Expenses, and Technology interventions, Office
Expenses, other Administrative Expenses and Professional Services etc., for Crop
Insurance program under PMFBY/RWBCIS. State/UTs should make provisions and
budgetary allocation on similar lines.
15. Central Program Management Unit (CPMU) & State Program
Management Unit (SPMU)
15.1 Central Program Management Unit (CPMU) has been created at the Central level
to provide technical support and professional advice on risk classification & rating,
research & development of new products, methodology for loss assessment
including technology interventions, legal works, workshops for training & capacity
building, along with the use of technology solutions including innovation, replication,
digitization of administration of Schemes etc. through NCIP.
15.2 CPMU shall calculate the Burn Cost (BC)/Loss Cost (LC) i.e., Claims as percentage
(%) of Sum Insured (SI) observed in case of notified crop(s) in notified unit area of
insurance during the preceding 10 similar crop seasons (Kharif/ Rabi) along with
approximate APR of the crops proposed to be notified for the season. The loss
cost/premium rate shall be provided exclusively to States/UTs on NCIP based on
the latest available yield data uploaded by the State/UTs before invitation for
premium bidding. The calculations provided on NCIP is only for reference purposes
to have information on the approximate cost as per the underlying risk associated
for providing insurance cover for the risks so as to enable the State Governments/UT
Administration to evaluate the bids in proper perspective.
15.3 CPMU shall also develop a suitable methodology for burn cost calculation, risk
classification & premium rating by using historical yield data, historical claim data
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
50

--- Page 51 ---
including add-on claims, weather data, use and level of inputs viz. irrigation,
technologies being used in crop cultivation & management, availability of remote
sensing data & information about other parameters influencing crop growth and
production etc., The CPMU shall also develop standardized methodology for risk
analysis and premium rating for crop insurance, calculation of GoI liability towards
premium subsidy and risk assessment and pricing methodology for insurance of
other allied sectors and assets belonging to Agriculture & Rural economy of the
country.
15.4 In line with creation of CPMU at Central level and the experience gained over the
last six successful years of implementation, it has been envisaged that all
States/UTs implementing the Schemes should also create a separate State PMU at
State Headquarter (HQ) level with sufficient technical experts/staff. This will ensure
continuity of manpower and creation of a resource pool ensuring better coordination
between the Centre and the State/UTs leading to effective and successful
implementation of the scheme at the ground level. SPMU may also opt for any
additional members on contractual/temporary basis or take services of other
organizations/research institutes etc., as per requirement. However, States shall
have to allocate a separate budget for running the SPMU (refer Para 14.1 above).
15.5 The States/UTs shall be categorized for creation of SPMUs as per the table below
and shall mandatorily onboard experts as detailed against their category. A minimum
of one position against the indicated category of positions may be hired. In addition,
the State/UT may hire additional positions as per their own requirement.
Category A Category B
State Positions State Positions
Madhya Pradesh  Remote Sensing Tripura
Rajasthan Specialist Jammu & Kashmir
Maharashtra  Data Analyst & Puducherry
Uttar Pradesh MIS Specialist Manipur
 Awareness &
Chhattisgarh  Awareness & A&N Islands
Communication
Karnataka Communication Sikkim
Specialist
Tamil Nadu Specialist Goa
 Capacity Building &
Haryana  Capacity Building Meghalaya
Training Specialist
Odisha & Training
 Financial &
Andhra Pradesh Specialist
Subsidy
Himachal Pradesh
 IT & Technical
Management
Uttarakhand
Specialist
Specialist
Assam
 Financial &
Kerala Subsidy
Jharkhand Management
Telangana Specialist
16. Seasonality Discipline
16.1 The cut-off date is uniform for both Loanee and non-loanee farmers. The District-
wise cut-off dates for different crops shall be based on the Crop Calendar of major
crops prepared in consultation with the concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations/ICAR and crop division of DA&FW which has also been published
on NCIP (www.pmfby.gov.in.). If any deviation is observed by the States/UTs from
the aforesaid list, it may be brought to the notice of the DA&FW for rectification, if
required. The SLCCCI, shall besides considering the prevailing agro-climatic
conditions, rainfall distribution/ availability of water for irrigation, sowing pattern etc.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
51

--- Page 52 ---
fix seasonality discipline of the coverage and other activities in such a way that it
does not encourage adverse selection or moral hazards during the enrollment
period. If the seasonality discipline as fixed by the SLCCCI is violated by States/UTs,
GoI may decide not to provide applicable premium subsidy for the concerned
season.
16.2 The cut-off date for enrolment of each notified crop should be based on crop
calendars of the districts and normally may not be beyond 15th July for Kharif, 15th
December for Rabi & 15th Feb for summer seasons. The notified crops should
mandatorily be categorized in three seasons Kharif, Rabi & Summer/Zaid crops
depending on sowing period and the cut-off date for enrolment may also be fixed
accordingly.
16.3 All State/UTs shall consider preponing the cut-off dates for Kharif and Rabi seasons.
Advancement of cut-off may help in reduction of premium rates during the tendering
years leading to reduction in financial burden on the State/UTs and may also help in
ample time duration for awareness generation and capacity building initiatives to
encourage farmers to get enrolled under the scheme
16.4 The broad indicative seasonality discipline is given in the Table 2 below:
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
Nodal
Conduct of SLCCCI meeting to take decision
15th November Department
for notification of Crops and areas, adoption of 1st June of
1 of Preceding of
Level of Indemnity and to inform crop wise sum current year
Year States/UTs
insured etc. for drafting of Tender documents.
.
Nodal
Uploading of requisite information/data on 30th November Department
15th June of
2 crop insurance Portal and Issuing of Tender of preceding of
current year
documents. Year States/UTs
.
Nodal
31st December Department
Finalization of Tender and award of work by 15th July of
3 of preceding of
State/UTs. current year
year States/UTs
.
Digitization of notification and uploading/ By
issuance of notification on NCIP for circulation State/UTs
amongst stakeholders. State Governments/UT 31st January of 16th August of and
4
Administrations & GoI will release their share of current year current year Concerned
subsidy as outlined in Para 6.1.6 of these Insurance
guidelines. Companies
By
State/UTs
Awareness/ sensitization/training program by From 15th 15th
and
5 State/UT Government and Insurance March of current September of
Concerned
Companies. year current year
Insurance
Companies
Within 24 hours after the release of
Start of enrolment of farmers for the season on GoI &
6 State Subsidy as per Para 6.1.6 of
NCIP (as per crop calendar). State/UTs.
these guidelines
7 Submission of YES-TECH Inception Report (IR) As per YES-TECH Manual 2023 TIPs
2 working 2 working days
Cut-off date for intimation of change of insured days prior to prior to cut-off Bank/Loane
8
crop by the loanee farmer. cut-off date for date for debit/ e Farmers.
debit/ collection of
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
52

--- Page 53 ---
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
collection of premiums from
premiums from farmers.
farmers.
At least 7 At least 7 days
Cut-off date for opting out of existing loanee days before before the
Bank/Loane
9 farmers from the scheme for current/ ongoing the prescribed prescribed cut-
e Farmers.
season. cut-off date for off date for
enrolment. enrolment.
Up to last
Up to last date
date of
of enrolment of
enrolment of
farmers as
Cut-off date for receipt of Applications of farmers as
notified by Banks/PAC
farmers/debit of premium from farmers account notified by
State/UTs for s/C SC/BCs/
(loanee and non- loanee) by all stakeholders State/UTs for
notified crop(s) Insurance
including banks/PACS/ BCs/ CSC/ insurance notified crop(s)
10 or up to 15th agent/online
agent/online enrolment by farmers etc. or up to 15th
December of enrolment
Note: *This is indicative only and district wise July of current
current year* byf armers
crop calendar will be the final basis to arrive at year*
*State/UTs etc.
cut-off date for enrolment of farmers. *State/UTs
may fix earlier
may fix earlier
dates for early
dates for early
Rabi crops.
Kharif crops.
Strictly within 15 days from cut-off State/UT
date for enrolment of farmers i.e., Governmen
11 Declaration of Prevented sowing.
31st July for Kharif and 31st t / Insurance
December for Rabi of current year. Companies
Cut-off date for generation of challan and
online/electronic remittance of Premium to
Within 15 days of cut-off date for
respective Insurance companies, uploading of
enrolment of farmers/debit of Banks/
details of individual covered loanee farmers on
premium for both loanee and non- NCIP/
12 NCIP by Bank branches for which premium has
loanee farmers i.e., 31st July for Insurance
already been remitted (CBs/ RRBs/ DCCBs/
Kharif and 31st Dec for Rabi of Companies
PACS) and tagging of uploaded applications as
current year
paid against the specific challan numbers
followed SMS to all insured farmers from NCIP.
Cut-off date for generation of challan on portal
and online/electronic remittance of farmer
Within 48 Hours of receipt of ICs and
premium to Insurance Companies for non-loanee
application & premium and their
13 farmers by designated insurance intermediaries,
maximum up to 48 Hours after the Intermediari
CSC-e-Gov & Banking Correspondents and
cutoff date for enrollment of farmers es, CSC e-
uploading of details of individual covered farmers
Gov.
on NCIP.
Within 15 days from the cut-off date
for uploading of data/ information by
Banks/ PACS/
CSC/Intermediaries/BCs
respectively for loanee farmers and
within 30 days for non-loanee Insurance
14 Cut-off date for Insurance Companies to accept,
farmers i.e. 15th August of current Companies
reject or revert the farmer's data on NCIP.
year for Kharif and 15th January of
next year for Rabi for loanee and
31st August of current year for Kharif
and 31st January of next year for
Rabi for Non Loanee.
CSCs/Bank
Cut-off date for CSCs/Banks/ Intermediary/ BCs
Within 7 days from the date of s/
15 to correct/update the paid application reported by
intimation by Insurance Companies. Intermediar
Insurance Companies on NCIP.
y/ BCs.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
53

--- Page 54 ---
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
Within 7 days from the date of
Cut-off date for Insurer to accept the submission of correction/ updation Insurance
16
corrected/updated applications. by the Bank/ CSCs/Intermediary Companies
BCs.
At least 15 days before date
Submission of report of over insurance or any prescribed for auto-approval, i.e.
Insurance
17 potential moral hazard etc. to the Government in latest by 31st August of current year
Companies
the prescribed proforma. for Kharif and 31st January of next
year for Rabi season.
60 days from the cut-off date for
Cut-off date for final processing of applications enrolment/debit of premium from
Insurance
by Insurance Companies and auto-approval of farmers i.e., 15th September of
18 Companies
application of insured farmers on NCIP and current year for Kharif and 15th
/ NCIP
closure of enrollment data for the season. February of next year for Rabi
Team.
season.
Cut-off date for Insurance Companies to hand
Within 15 days from acceptance of
over acknowledgment receipt under Meri Policy
applications by concerned
Mere Haath (MPMH) and to the insured farmers Insurance
19 Insurance Companies on NCIP or
and organize training workshops for the farmers Companies
as communicated by GoI and/or
at village/Gram Panchayat level under Fasal
State/UT Government
Bima Pathshala (FBP)
60 days before of the cut-off date for
Cut-off date for raising demand along with
enrolment of farmers, i.e. before
supporting documents for release of advance Insurance
20 15th May of current year for Kharif
premium subsidy as per Para 6.1.7 of the Companies
and 15th October of current year for
Operational Guidelines
Rabi season.
Within 30 days from receipt of
demand from Insurance Companies
and before opening of the NCIP for
GoI & State
Release of advance upfront premium subsidy enrollment of farmers for respective
Governmen
21 (First Instalment) i.e. as outlined in Para 6.1.7 of seasons, i.e. at-least 30 days before
ts
the Operational Guidelines the cut-off date of enrolment of
/UTs.
farmers viz. 15th June of current
year for Kharif and 15th November
of current year for Rabi season.
Submission of YES-TECH Mid-Season Report As per the YES-TECH Manual 2023
22 TIPs
(MSR) and the State/UT Notification
Submission of Special Report (SR) in case of
As per the YES-TECH Manual 2023
23 Preventive Sowing/Failed Germination and Mid- TIPs
and the State/UT Notification
Season Calamities
Insurance
Within 7 days from the day the
24 Raising dispute to DGRC or SGRC or STAC Company/S
anomaly/dispute has been observed
tate Govt.
State/UT
Governmen
Arriving at technology-based validation of
t/through
Preventive Sowing/Failed Germination and/or
TIPs/MITR/
Mid-season calamity in case of substandard Within 1 month from formal
25 STAC
Crop Loss assessment or disputed loss report or submission of the dispute
and/or GoI
the loss surveys not conducted or not uploaded
through
by State/UTs on NCIP
CTAC/MNC
FC
Up to15th Up to 15th Designated
August* of January* of Ground
Training and registration of field level workers current year next year Level field
26 assigned for conduct of CCEs and reporting of *State/UTs *State/UTs Functionari
the same on Crop Insurance Portal through may fix earlier may fix earlier es/
smart phones/ CCE Agri App. dates for early dates for early State/Distric
Kharif crops. Rabi crops. t Level
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
54

--- Page 55 ---
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
Nodal
Officer.
Up to 31st Up to 30th
August* of January of next
Registration of mobile number of Insurance current year year
Insurance
27 Company’s representative for co-witnessing of *State/UTs *State/UTs
Companies
CCEs. may fix earlier may fix earlier
dates for early dates for early
Kharif crops. Rabi crops
Up to 15th Up to 15th
August* of January* of
current year next year
*These dates * These dates
Cut-off dates for identification and sharing of list State/UT
may be fixed may be fixed
28 of Districts and Crops with MNCFC for Nodal
separately for separately for
optimization of CCEs through SST Department
each State/UT each State/UT
and crop-wise and crop-wise
for major/ for major/
minor crops. minor crops.
Up to 31st Up to 31st
August of January of next
Cut-off dates for intimation to concerned
current year * year *
States/UTs about the areas (IUs/Tehsils/ Taluks
29 *These dates * These dates MNCFC
& Districts) for Major crops for carrying out CCEs
may be fixed may be fixed
through SST method for Crop Yield Estimation
separatelyf or separately for
each State/UT. each State/UT.
a) Uploading of tentative schedule/date for Concerned
conducting CCEs (crop-wise/IU wise) followed Department
by SMS on one day notice through CCEs Agri- At least 7 days before tentative date of
30 app. Insurance Companies are equally for conducting CCEs. States/UTs
responsible to liaise with district authorities/field to
workers to ascertain the schedule. incorporate
Via SMS on one day notice through the same in
b) Confirmation of the CCEs schedule.
NCIP. Notification.
Timeline for lodging online complaint about
erroneous CCEs data or yield estimation Within 2 hours of conduct of CCEs Insurance
31
procedure adopted by the primary workers/field through CCE Agri App. Companies
officials of the State/UT Govt.
Within one month of completion of Nodal
Approval of district wise crop wise Actual yield CCEs from district wise crop wise Department
32
data by District Administration on NCIP. specific cut-off dates notified by of
States/UTs for a notified crop. States/UTs.
Within 7 days from the date of ICs as
Cut-off date for intimation/ reconciliation/
33 uploading CCE Data by State/ UT flagged on
clarification of any deficiency in Actual Yield data.
Nodal Department, if any. NCIP.
Submission of YES-TECH End of Season Report As per the YES-TECH Manual 2023
34 TIPs
(ESR) and the State/UT Notification
Within 7 days
of clarification Within 7 days of
Cut-off date for resolution by State/UT sought by clarification State/UT
35 Government on clarification sought by Insurance Insurance sought by ICs/ Governmen
Companies/ flagged on NCIP. Companies/ flagged on t.
flagged on Portal.
Portal.
Cut-off date for raising demand with supporting 2nd tranche - 2nd tranche -
documents for release of 2nd and subsequent 30th 15th February; Insurance
36
tranche of premium subsidy based on approved September; Subsequent Companies
applications as available on NCIP. Subsequent tranche (if any)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
55

--- Page 56 ---
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
tranche (if any) as per
as per requirement,
requirement, once in a
once in a month.
month.
GoI and its
CNA and
Release of 2nd and subsequent tranches of Within 15 days from the receipt of
nodal
37 premium subsidy based on the demand raised by demand/requisition from Insurance
department
the Insurance Companies. Company on NCIP
s/SNA of
State/UTs
Within 15 days of cut-off date for
Cut-off date for raising demand with supporting auto-approval of enrollment data on
documents for release of final tranche of NCIP, i.e. 30th September of current Insurance
38
premium subsidy based on enrollment data year for Kharif and 28th/29th Companies
finalized on NCIP. February of next year for Rabi
season.
GoI and its
Within 30 days from the receipt of CNA and
Release of final tranche of premium subsidy
demand/requisition from Insurance nodal
39 based on the demand raised by the Insurance
Company on NCIP department
Companies.
s/SNA of
State/UTs
Within one week from receipt of
GoI/
yield data /reply to clarification
40 Auto-approval of yield data. through
sought by Insurance Companies by
NCIP.
State/UT Government.
Uploading and Approval of final Actual Yield data Within one month of completion of Nodal
on NCIP after applying corresponding weightage CCEs from district wise crop wise Department
41
on the Crop Yield Estimation values arrived specific cut off date’s notified by of
through CCEs and YES-TECH States/UTs for a notified crop. States/UTs.
Within 1 week from Approval of AY
Acceptance of AY values uploaded & approved values by the State/UTs or the date
Insurance
42 by States/UTs on NCIP or auto-approved by of auto-approval on NCIP, else
Companies
NCIP values shall be auto-approved by
NCIP
Insurance
Raising yield related dispute to DGRC or SGRC Within 7 days from the day the
43 Company/S
or STAC anomaly/dispute has been observed
tate Govt.
Within 1 month of submission of
State/UT
dispute or completion of CCEs from
Governmen
Arriving at technology-based yield data in case of district wise crop wise specific cut-
t/through
inadequate number of CCEs or substandard or off dates notified by State/UTs for a
TIPs/MITR
44 disputed CCEs or the CCEs not conducted or not notified crop or
and/or GoI
approved by State/UTs on NCIP submission/approval of yield for
through
claim calculation by ICs, whichever
MNCFC
is earlier.
Within 7 days of approval of Crop
NCIP and
Sharing of detailed information of claims with Damage Assessment surveys and
45 Insurance
bank branches & other Stakeholders from NCIP Approval of AY & TY values on
Companies
NCIP
Within 21 Days from calculation of
claims on NCIP irrespective of
whether Insurance Companies Insurance
46 Timelines for Payment of claims.
have raised the demand for 2nd or Companies
final tranche of premium subsidy
and whether the verification and
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
56

--- Page 57 ---
Action to
S. No. Activity Kharif Rabi
bet aken by
Quality Check has been completed
by Insurance Companies. Failing
which, penalty shall be auto-
calculated and levied as per
relevant provisions through NCIP.
Extracting the list of loanee farmers from NCIP to
whom claims have been paid directly to
beneficiary accounts/ Direct Benefit Transfer Banks/
(DBT) for reconciliation of claims amount. In case Within a week after remittance of Farmers/
47
of Non Loanee, reconciliation of claims, if claims. State
required, to be done by enrolling agencies in Governmen
consultation with concerned bank or State/UT t/UTs/
Government. CSCs.
Nodal
Within month of July each year.
Department
Discussion with each Insurance
Evaluation of ICs based on performance of
Company to be completed by 25th
48 Evaluation Matrix for combined Kharif and Rabi respective
July each year and final report to be
seasons of a particular year. State/UT
submitted latest by 31st July to the
Governmen
GoI by the State/UTs.
t.
Confirmation & Validation on performance Within 15 days from date of
Evaluation done by Nodal Department for submission of evaluation report by
49 GoI
combined Kharif and Rabi seasons of a particular the respective State
year. Governments/UT Administrations.
16.5 In case the cut-off date for enrollment of farmers and debit of premium falls on a
public holiday or is declared as a public holiday by the Central or State/UT
Government or there is disruption of services due to strikes or shut-down or any kind
of calamity or catastrophic event etc., the next working day shall be treated as the
cut-off date for enrollment and debit of premium. Concerned State/UTs have to take
timely action and decision in this regard and send a formal intimation to the GoI for
requisite rectification on NCIP. The subsequent Cut-off dates for each activity
pertaining to actions on finalization of enrollment data shall be deemed to be shifted
by the number of days the cut-off date is shifted.
16.6 In case of disruption of services due to natural events beyond human control or
technical or software or network related issues with the NCIP the subsequent dates
may be extended by the competent authority of Government of India on the basis of
specific written inputs from NCIP team. However, due care has to be taken that such
extension does not lead to a moral hazard and misuse of the Scheme and suitable
measures should be put forth for the same accordingly.
16.7 Further, in case of more than two major crop season(s) pattern in any specific
States/UTs, a modified seasonality discipline keeping in view the overall seasonality
discipline prescribed above, shall be approved and adopted by SLCCCI.
16.8 Keeping in view the specific nature of crop and scope for catastrophic crop
damage, SLCCCI shall fix seasonality discipline in such a way that it does not
encourage adverse selection or moral hazards and also ensures timely
payment of claims to eligible insured farmers. Scheme also has provisions for
claims due to prevented sowing and option to change the insured crop, hence,
the State Governments/UT Administrations will take all necessary steps to
ensure enrolment of farmers well within the stipulated time under the Scheme.
No request/relaxation for the extension in the above seasonality/cut-off dates shall be
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
57

--- Page 58 ---
considered/ granted by the GoI once it is fixed and notified for the crop season.
However, preponement in cut-off dates shall be considered on a case-to-case basis.
If any State/ UT extends the above seasonality/cut-off dates on its-own without
approval of the GoI, the GoI share of premium subsidy shall not be provided for the
concerned notified crops /areas.
16.9 It may be noted that, under no circumstance, will GoI or any State/UT extend
the cut-off dates for enrolment of farmers except for the Para 16.6. However,
in case the States/UTs decide to do so, it may be done only in agreement with
implementing Insurance Company. The State/UT shall mandatorily obtain the
consent of the implementing Insurance Company and submit the same to the
GoI along with the cut-off date extension request. In such cases, however no
central premium subsidy will be provided for the areas & crops which are
covered/insured during the extended period and the concerned State/UT has
to bear the entire subsidy liability for the said coverage.
16.10 There may be exceptional circumstances or technical glitches due to which farmers’
data could not be uploaded on NCIP, however, the corresponding premium was
remitted to the concerned insurance companies within the given cut-off-date, the
State Govt./UT may request GoI for a special window to enter such data on NCIP
beyond normal window for data entry as per seasonality discipline. GoI, based on
the facts submitted shall review the matter and may allow a special window for data
entry. GoI may ask the State Govt. to furnish the consent of concerned Insurance
Company, if the same is felt necessary.
16.11 Similarly, due to technical glitches, premium remittance gets failed despite attempts
made by the stakeholders to remit the same within cut-off date. In this case State
Govt./UT may request GoI for a special window to re-attempt remittance of premium
through NCIP beyond normal window for premium remittance as per seasonality
discipline. GoI upon examination, may allow a special window for challan creation
and enabling premium remittances through NCIP. The challans for such cases shall
be made by the concerned Insurance Company upon due validation and shall be
shared with the concerned stakeholder for re-initiating the payments.
16.12 In case CCE data submitted through CCE Agri App is not approved within the
stipulated timelines, the same will be approved automatically and used for claim
calculation. In case of non-submission of Actual Yield data by the State/UT
Government to implementing Insurance Companies or failure of the State/UT to
upload and approve the same on NCIP within stipulated timelines, Synthetic Yield
data arrived using Technology Based Solutions and having 100% weightage shall be
used for calculation of admissible claims and subsequent settlement of claims to the
eligible farmers. The cut-off date for submission of yield data to Insurance Companies
is normally one month after the completion of harvesting of a particular crop.
16.13 In a situation where total claims have been approved or auto approved, the
Insurance Companies shall be liable to pay claims within 3 weeks of
calculation/auto-approval of claims irrespective of whether Insurance Companies
have raised the demand for 2nd tranche of premium subsidy or not. Also, the
Insurance Company shall not put the claim settlement on hold due to ongoing or
pending KYC or crop-land area verification as the same is expected to be completed
before the initiation of final claims for the season. Further, it is advised that Insurance
Company raises the demand for 2nd tranche of premium subsidy within the given
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
58

--- Page 59 ---
timelines. If the release of 2nd tranche is pending on account of non-submission of
demand for claiming the said amount by the Insurance Companies, the timelines of
payment of claims shall be counted from prescribed date of approval of claim data
(AY-TY or Loss %age) and not from date of actual payment of 2nd tranche of subsidy.
16.14 All types of admissible claims shall mandatorily be paid within the stipulated cut-off
date failing which penal interest @ 12% per annum shall be payable to the farmers
on admissible pending claims beyond stipulated timelines for various kinds of
localized and area approach add-on claims including the final yield claims. subject
to release of applicable subsidy premium by the State Governments/UT
Administrations. This mechanism shall be mandatorily applicable from Kharif
2024 onwards. In case the State/UT subsidy share is not released within the
stipulated cut-off date then the Insurance Companies shall release the claims on
pro-rata basis against the premium received. The penal interest as above shall also
be applicable on delay of claim settlement for the liability of State Governments/UT
Administrations in case of “Cup & Cap” models under alternate risk management
mechanism.
16.15 Since the yield data is being finalized by the State Government/UT Administrations
and uploaded on NCIP, the admissible penal interest rate shall be calculated on the
NCIP and the same shall be added to the payable claims of eligible farmers through
DigiClaim module of NCIP. Non-Compliance by the Insurance Companies shall lead
to further administrative action by the GoI.
17 Collection of Applications and Premium from Farmers
17.1 The branches of all scheduled commercial banks, regional rural banks, and
cooperative banks shall act as nodal branches for enrolment of farmers in the NCIP.
The primary agriculture credit societies (PACS) attached with cooperative bank
branches will enroll the farmers through concerned branches of the cooperative
bank. The concerned Lead bank and Regional offices/ Administrative offices of
Commercial banks/RRBs will provide necessary guidelines to the concerned bank
branches and coordinate with them to ensure that all concerned branches
compulsorily generate the payment challan and remit the consolidated farmers
premium electronically/online through payment gateway on NCIP to the concerned
Insurance Companies and enter the details of applications on NCIP within the
stipulated cut-off dates for uploading the application level data on NCIP. Besides,
for the coverage of non-loanee farmers, Insurance Companies may also use IRDAI
approved insurance intermediaries. The details of such intermediaries including in-
house and outsourced manpower and infrastructure deployed for the enrolment and
providing other services to the insured farmers under the scheme should
compulsorily be submitted to the State Governments/UT Administrations and the
GoI and updated/approved on NCIP well before the start of the season. The
Insurance Companies shall register/approve the Insurance Intermediaries on NCIP
and create login credentials for the same in order to enable them for enrollment of
individual insured/covered farmers on NCIP using digital platform viz. AIDE App.
Alternatively, the Insurance Intermediaries can self-register on NCIP and declare
their willingness enroll non-loanee farmers under the scheme.
17.2 All the Banks are required to upload the insured farmers' data mandatorily on the
NCIP using the fully automated mode of data entry using API integration between
CBS/middleware utility and NCIP or by manually entering the data for each
application through web-portal. No other platform shall be used for uploading or
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
59

--- Page 60 ---
submission of enrolled applications to insurance companies. Those farmers whose
data is uploaded on the NCIP shall only be eligible for Insurance coverage and
accordingly the premium subsidy will also be released by the State/UT and Central
Govt. basis the data availability on NCIP. In cases where farmers are denied crop
insurance due to incorrect or partial data entry or non-uploading of their
details on NCIP, the concerned Banks, their Branches and Intermediaries shall
be responsible for payment of eligible claims to the affected farmers (If any).
17.3 In order to facilitate timely release of Government subsidy and remittance of claims
to the farmers, entry of detailed information of all insured farmers on NCIP is
mandatory for all bank branches/PACS/ BCs/CSCs/ Intermediaries/Designated
Insurance Agents and Insurance Companies.
17.4 Farmer for a specific parcel of land will be allowed to enroll themselves from one
channel of enrolment only (Banks, CSC, Insurance Intermediaries, Insurance
Company or directly by the Farmers using Web-portal or Mobile Application etc.) for
the notified crops. If the farmer is having multiple crops on that parcel of land then
also he/she shall enroll his/her desired crops through same channel of enrollment.
The Enrollment channels shall also submit single application for mixed crops and
mention proportionate area of that parcel under each crop in the web-portal or other
digital platform viz. AIDE App.
17.5 IRDAI is in process of developing a women centric rural distribution channel named
as Bima Vahak. The channel shall also be made operational for enrollment of
farmers under PMFBY as and when the same is established & notified.
17.6 Loanee Farmers:
17.6.1 Whenever banks sanction crop loan/KCC for the notified crop in a notified area
for the given season, the crop loan amount to the extent of notified Sum
Insured for notified crop and acreage of individual notified crop of loanee
farmers shall be taken into consideration for coverage, provided that the
farmers have not submitted their choice to opt out from the scheme by a way
of self-declaration for that particular season, as per seasonality discipline.
Based on seasonality of crop, banks should separately calculate the eligibility of loan
amount for coverage during both Kharif and Rabi seasons based on the notified Sum
Insured and declared acreage under notified crops as mentioned in the KCC Loan
documents or subsequently submitted by the farmer based on their changed
cropping pattern. KCC Loan disbursing bank branch/PACS shall prepare and update
the statement of crop-wise and insurance unit-wise details of eligible and non-opted
out farmers for crop insurance with applicable farmer’s share of premium to be
debited from the respective KCC Accounts and initiate premium remittance to the
concerned Insurance Companies as per the timelines outlined in the seasonality. If
required, the loan disbursing bank branches/PACS shall finance additional
loan amount equal to the premium amount payable by farmer for getting
enrolled under the scheme in case the available limit under the KCC Loan has
been fully exhausted at the time of enrollment period.
17.6.2 For insurance coverage of a farmer, Sum Insured value for a notified crop and
season shall be notified and digitized on the NCIP by the State/UTs within given
timelines. The cut-off date for enrollment shall solely be based on the dates notified
by the States/UTs and digitized on NCIP for the notified crops & season and shall
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
60

--- Page 61 ---
be independent of actual date of disbursement/withdrawal of full or part KCC loan.
Farmers having KCC loans for Kharif & Rabi crops with renewal dates falling after
cut-off date for enrollment and debit of premium (renew/sanction period) for the
season shall also be eligible for enrollment under the scheme for the same crop
season subject to the prevailing loan being standard loan and debiting of applicable
premium within the cut-off dates as outlined in the seasonality Discipline or Digitized
on NCIP by the States/UTs. In order to eliminate excess insurance and rationalize
government subsidy, utmost care shall be taken to ensure that only correct acreage
under each notified crop as per KCC loan application or subsequently declared by
the farmer based on his/her changed cropping practice is considered for coverage
of notified crop and not the overall total acreage. Bank Branches and PACS shall be
liable for inspection/verification/validation by the GoI/State/UT or agencies
designated by them to verify and validate instances of excess insurance or potential
misappropriation of government funds.
17.6.3 All enrolment agencies including cooperative banks and PACS shall provide valid
and fully operational bank account details of farmers viz. complete bank account
number, Indian Financial System Code (IFSC) to enable direct transfer of claims into
the farmers account. The bank account should be able to receive credit directly
through electronic remittance. The non-computerized and non-CBS PACS who
maintain a non-compliant serialized loan identification number of borrowers shall
mandatorily enter Saving Bank Account of the loan account holder maintained at the
concerned District Central Cooperative Bank for the purpose. In absence of correct
and operational account number on NCIP, the claims for the eligible farmers shall
be initiated through Aadhaar Based Payment System (AEPS) into Aadhaar ceded
bank account number. The concerned banks shall not raise any objection to the
process in case of their failure to provide the correct and DBT compliant bank
account number.
17.6.4 Any reporting of excess acreages under insurance in comparison to the sown
acreage will be liable for initiation of documentary and physical
inspection/verification/validation by the GoI/State/UT or agencies designated by
them and lead to administrative action if gross negligence and malpractice in
reporting of insurance acreage is found at farmer's or enrolment channel's end.
17.6.5 Benefit of add on products viz., Prevented sowing/ On-Account Payment for Mid-
season Adversity/ Localized Calamity shall be available to only those farmers who
have paid the premium or the premium has been debited from their account before
the peril occurrence notification by the State Governments/UT Administrations for
invoking this provision for compensation. Hence, Banks must ensure that they debit
farmers premium immediately after the cut-off date of opting out of loanee farmers,
failing which banks will be liable to meet the claim liabilities of uncovered eligible
farmers.
17.6.6 Detailed example for Calculation of crop-wise Sum Insured (SI) for the season for
coverage of loanee farmers is given in Table 3 below:
Crop 1 Crop 2 Crop 3 Crop 4 Crop 5 Crop 6
8
Total Land Ownership Ha)
Kharif Rabi
Name of Crop Paddy Maize Cotton Wheat Potato Gram
Actual Sown Area (Ha) under 5 2 1 6 1 1
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
61

--- Page 62 ---
the crop
Area (Ha) declared in KCC
2 1 1 2 1 1
application
Crop Season Kharif Rabi
Scale of
Finance /(NAY*MSP/Farm 50,000 40,000 60,000 50,000 70,000 30,000
gate price) (Rs./Ha)
Total Sanctioned Sub limit for
1,00,000 40,000 60000 1,00,000 70,000 30,000
crop cultivation
Season-wise sub limit for crop
2,00,000 2,00,000
cultivation
Additional loan amount for
consumption and maintenance
1,20,000
of machinery
etc. (max. Upto 30%)
Total sanctioned loan for a
5,20,000
year
Whether Crops notified by
Yes Yes No Yes No No
State/UT
Crop wise SI (Rs./Ha) - -
SI to be considered for
50,000 40,000 50,000
Insurance /Ha
Total SI to be considered for
1,00,000 40,000 1,00,000
Insurance
SI for Loanee farmers 1,00,000 40,000 - 1,00,000
Farmer’s Share of Premium
2% 2% - 1.5% - -
(% of SI)
Premium to be debited from
2,000 800 1,500
KCC
Total Farmer’s Premium
2,800 1,500
(Loanee)
Insured Area through
2 1 2
coverage
Balance Un-covered area
3 1 4
(Ha)*
Additional premium (as non -
3,000 800 - 3,000
loanee )*
Total Farmer’s Premium (as
3,800 3,000
non - loanee )*
Total Premium of Farmers
(both as loanee and 6,600 4,500
non- loanee)
*Note: The Area which has been left out of coverage as loanee farmer for the notified
crop can be insured by the farmer as a non-loanee farmer by depositing additional
applicable premium along with required relevant documents.
17.6.7 Farmers having crop loans sanctioned through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) are
covered as loanee farmer and banks shall maintain all back up records and registers
relating to compliance with the seasonality discipline for debiting and remittance of
farmers premium on or before the respective cut-off-date and the cut-off dates for
submission of coverage details on NCIP. Bank branch shall apportion coverage area
among insurable crops, based on acreage mentioned in loan application or on the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
62

--- Page 63 ---
basis of actual area sown as declared by the farmer subsequently but prior to the
cut-off-date for debit of farmers premium and enrollment of farmers under the
scheme.
17.6.8 Bank Branches of Commercial Banks (CBs) and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)/
Nodal Bank Branch in case of PACS under its jurisdiction shall submit individual
insured farmer's application details along with the challan number details of premium
remittance through NCIP.
17.6.9 Different options for entry of details of enrolled farmers on NCIP are available for
bank branches in a more transparent and efficient manner. Banks can upload the
details of insured farmers through online web-application mode. Banks are required
to enter the information continuously without waiting for last day for premium debit
and data entry.
17.6.10 As an alternative, direct integration of Core Banking Solution (CBS) or middleware
utility with NCIP using API based data exchange protocols has also been
successfully initiated and the same may be used by Scheduled Commercial Banks
(SCBs)/RRBs/District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) available on CBS for
pushing the farmers' details in bulk directly without filling the individual farmer's
details on web-portal.
17.6.11 The scheme will work on the "Opt-out" mode for the existing loanee farmers. The
farmers can choose not to be enrolled under the Scheme by giving a signed
declaration as per prescribed format (Annexure-VI) specifying the season and
mentioning their unwillingness to participate in the scheme any time during the year
for the upcoming/ongoing season but atleast 7 days before the cut-off date for
enrolment and debiting of farmers premium. The opt-out mechanism so adopted
shall only be applicable for one season-year only; for which the opt-out declaration
has been given by the farmer. Farmers can use available communication mediums
for communicating their willingness for "opt-out" to their respective bank branches,
however, they will ensure that their willingness is received and recorded by the bank
within the aforesaid prescribed period. No bank branch shall forcefully make the
farmers to opt-out from the scheme. Any such complaint received from the farmers
shall be dealt with stringent action by GoI. Bank branches shall maintain and
store such declarations submitted by the farmers for
inspection/verification/validation by the GoI/State/UT or agencies designated
by them.
17.6.12 Banks need to debit farmer's share of premium within the last 7 days up to enrolment
cut-off date. During this period, the banks may also prepare the final list of farmers
who have opted-out and all eligible loanee farmers to be covered under the scheme.
17.6.13 In case the farmer has submitted a declaration for opting-out from the scheme for a
season earlier in previous year he will be enrolled automatically for the current
season by the bank branch as a normal process without any requirement for the
farmer to submit written or oral consent for the purpose unless the farmer himself
has submitted opt-out form for the current season as well.
17.6.14 Declaration for "Opting-out" will have to be submitted by the farmer in the same bank
branch where they have their KCC Loan account. Formats for "Opting-out" are
already circulated to relevant stakeholders and is annexed at Annexure-VI of these
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
63

--- Page 64 ---
guidelines for reference.
17.6.15 Banks shall ensure mandatory enrolment of all those loanee farmers who have
indicated their willingness to enroll by not submitted declarations for Opting-out up
to 7 days before the cut-off date, for enrolment and debiting of farmers premium. In
case of failure of entry of data of eligible and willing farmers leading to farmers
being left without insurance cover, the liability for all such applications and
farmers shall rest with the concerned bank branches and accordingly they
shall make the eligible claim payment to the concerned farmers.
17.6.16 In cases where the farmer's application has been rejected by the Insurance
Company as per the provisions of Operational Guidelines, farmer's remittance for
such applications must be refunded back to the farmer's bank account within 45
days of closure of cut-off date for uploading of data by Banks, PACS etc., failing
which the Insurance Company will be constrained to accept the application and pay
claims as per normal process.
17.6.17 All rejected applications may be re-opened for review & verification purpose if the
State/UT Government and/or GoI decides to do so.
17.7 Non-Loanee Farmers through Banks and other Channel Partners
17.7.1 All non-loanee farmers desirous of availing crop insurance shall approach the
nearest bank branch or CSC-VLE or other intermediaries or agencies duly
authorized/empaneled by the GoI or licensed insurance intermediary authorized by
the insurance company or the employees of the Insurance Company or may also
visit NCIP or use Crop Insurance app or AIDE App for the same.
17.7.2 Loanee farmers who have opted-out of the scheme and want to avail crop insurance
for the notified crops can enroll themselves through the available enrollment
channels. In this case the farmer shall be treated as non-loanee farmer.
17.7.3 In case of submission through Bank Branches and their BCs, farmers shall approach
the nearest branch of a Commercial Bank or RRB or PACS or DCCB or designated
Banking Correspondent with applicable insurance premium amount and other
relevant documents. Bank Branch may, after completing verification of documents,
accept or reject the application in accordance with the provisions of applicable
guidelines and notification details as available on NCIP. Premium shall be accepted
by the bank branch preferably from the farmer's operational account in the same
bank branch itself and the same would be remitted to the concerned Insurance
Company within the stipulated time for ensuring the insurance coverage. It is the
responsibility of bank branch to complete the application of farmer and submit the
same on NCIP so that not a single farmer who desires to avail crop insurance
coverage is left out from the purview of crop insurance scheme.
17.7.4 In case of application submitted through CSC-VLE, the CSC-VLE shall authenticate
the farmer using their biometric authentication using Aadhaar services made
available by UIDAI for filling up the online application. Having a bank account is
essential for such cases. In this case, CSC-VLE will upload all requisite and desired
supporting documents on NCIP while filling up the application form on behalf of the
farmer. Applications without requisite documents would not be considered for
insurance coverage and CSC-VLE themselves shall be responsible for proper filling
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
64

--- Page 65 ---
of application form to ensure the farmer is enrolled under the scheme to receive the
intended benefits.
17.7.5 CSC/Bank Branch/PACS/designated BCs officials will assist the farmers in
completing the insurance application and provide necessary guidance. While
accepting the applications and premium, CSC/Bank Branch/PACS/BCs will be
responsible for verification of required documents, eligible sum insured, applicable
premium rate, etc. In case of coverage through non-computerized PACS, they will
consolidate these particulars and send them directly to respective Nodal Bank
Branches/DCCBs which will, in turn, submit application details online on NCIP and
generate crop wise challan electronically on the NCIP, for the e-remittance of
consolidated premium through challan using payment gateway of NCIP to
concerned Insurance Companies within the stipulated timelines as outlined in
Operational Guidelines of digitized on NCIP. Besides CSC-VLEs, other
Government/Semi-Government institutions and organizations proposed to be
utilized for insurance of non-loanee farmers after their integration with the NCIP shall
be done by DA&FW, GoI after obtaining due administrative approvals.
17.7.6 Non-loanee farmers could also be serviced directly by any designated agencies,
duly authorized by the GoI, or insurance intermediaries licensed by the IRDAI for the
purpose and they will act as a guide and facilitator wherein they will advise such
non loanee farmers about the benefits and desirability of the Scheme and guide the
farmers about procedures involved, collect requisite premium and remit individual/
consolidated premium electronically to Insurance Companies and upload details of
each insured farmer compulsorily within stipulated timelines on the NCIP using
digital platforms like NCIP or AIDE App mandatorily.
17.7.7 While accepting the applications and the premium from aforesaid designated
insurance intermediaries, it shall be the responsibility of Insurance Companies or its
designated intermediaries to verify insurable interest and collect the land records,
Aadhaar Number, particulars of acreage, sum insured, crop sown details etc. and
applicable contract/agreement details in case of sharecroppers or tenant farmer.
The designated intermediaries shall enter the data of farmers on web-portal or other
digital platform viz. AIDE App, remit the premium within 2 days to Insurance
Companies. However, it is mandatory that the non-loanee farmers serviced by the
designated intermediaries should hold a bank account and Aadhaar Number or
Aadhaar Enrolment Number in order to get insured and the designated
intermediaries will also facilitate in providing other services and insurance of other
assets and crops under SARTHI Platform.
17.7.8 In cases where the farmer's application has been rejected by the Insurance
Company as per the provisions of Operational Guidelines, farmer's remittance for
such applications must be refunded back to the farmer's bank account by the
concerned Insurance Company within 45 days of closure of cut-off date for
uploading of data by Banks, PACS etc., failing which the Insurance Company will be
constrained to accept the application and pay claims as per normal process.
17.7.9 All rejected applications may be re-opened for review & verification purpose if the
State/UT Government and/or GoI decides to do so.
17.7.10 For farmers buying crop insurance through CSC-VLEs or online, OTP/Aadhaar
enabled verification shall be construed as consent and signature of the applicant for
availing coverage under the scheme.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
65

--- Page 66 ---
17.8 Non-Loanee Farmers - Directly to Insurance Companies or through Web
Portal
17.8.1 Non-Loanee farmer may contact the Insurance Company and submit the requisite
and desired supporting documents and applicable premium through conventional
method or through electronic mode.
17.8.2 Non-loanee farmer can also submit application forms for getting insurance coverage
through NCIP or Crop Insurance App. For this, a farmer can fill up the online
application form available on NCIP (www.pmfby.gov.in) or Crop Insurance App and
pay the requisite premium electronically through the payment gateway. As soon as
the application is submitted through the system, an acknowledgement receipt will be
generated along with a unique application number. Additionally, intimation will also
be sent through SMS on registered mobile number of the farmer. In this case,
farmers themselves will upload all requisite and desired supporting documents on
web-portal or mobile app while filling up the application form. Applications without
requisite documents would not be considered for insurance coverage and farmers
themselves shall be responsible for proper filling of application form to ensure that
they are enrolled under the scheme to receive the intended benefits.
17.8.3 It is mandatory that Non-Loanee farmers, willing to enroll themselves under the
scheme shall have insurable interest and submit necessary documentary evidence
as proof to confirm the same. SLCCCI may decide the documentary proofs to be
mandated for submission along with Aadhaar Number or Aadhaar Enrolment
Number. The insured farmer will lose the premium and the right to claim (if any) if
the material facts furnished in the application are found to be wrong or incorrect at
any stage from enrollment till claim settlement. Such farmers shall be liable to return
the claim even if already paid if the same is demanded by the States/UTs upon
finding and validation of any wrong or incorrect information.
17.8.4 Insurance Company retains the right to accept or reject applications under the
scheme within 15 days and 30 days after the cut-off date for data entry on NCIP for
Loanee and Non-Loanee farmers respectively by the concerned enrollment
channels. In case the application is incomplete or not accompanied by necessary
documentary proof, Aadhaar Number or Aadhaar Enrolment Number or
corresponding insurance premium, the application shall be rejected and the
Insurance Company will fully refund the collected premium to the applicant.
17.8.5 In cases where the farmer's application has been rejected by the Insurance
Company as per the provisions of Operational Guidelines, farmer's remittance for
such applications must be refunded back to the farmer's bank account within 45
days of closure of cut-off date for uploading of data by Banks, PACS, CSC-VLEs,
other authorized agencies/entities, BCs, Insurance Intermediaries etc., failing which
the Insurance Company will be constrained to accept the application and pay claims
as per normal process.
17.8.6 All rejected applications may be re-opened for review & verification purpose if the
State Governments/UTs and/or GoI decides to do so.
17.9 Option for change of crop name by the Farmer
17.9.1 All loanee farmers can change the name of the insured crop from the original crop
indicated in the KCC loan application but such change should be submitted in writing
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
66

--- Page 67 ---
to the concerned bank branch up to 2 working days before the cut-off date for
enrolment and accordingly their newly proposed crops should be insured provided
that the new crop is also notified under the scheme by the State/UT. Bank will ensure
that all standard loans (as defined by concerned FIs) sanctioned and renewed for
notified crops within stipulated cut-off date should be covered if the farmers has not
opted-out upto 7 days before cut-off dates for enrolment and debiting of farmers
premium. In case the premium debited earlier was higher, concerned Bank branch
or Insurance Company shall credit or refund the excess premium as the case may
be to farmer's account. In case the premium debited earlier was less, bank shall
debit additional premium and remit to the concerned Insurance Company within the
cut-off date as outlined in Operational Guidelines or digitized on NCIP.
17.9.2 Similarly, all non-loanee farmers already covered under the scheme before actual
sowing or transplanting, based on advance crop planning, will also have the option
to change the crop. For any reason if a farmer changes the crop planned earlier,
they should intimate the change to Insurance Company, up to 2 working days before
the cut-off-date for enrolment through their original enrolment channel such as bank
branch/ insurance intermediary or directly as the case may be, and pay the
difference in premium, if any, accompanied with revised sowing certificate issued by
concerned village/ sub-district level official of the State/UT. In case the premium
debited earlier was higher, concerned Bank branch or Insurance Company shall
credit or refund the excess premium as the case may be to farmer's account.
17.10 Incomplete applications or applications with wrong farmer’s and land details or
applications with debited premium remitted by the Banks/ PACS/BCs or Insurance
Intermediaries after the cut-off date shall be summarily rejected by the concerned
Insurance Companies as per the timelines given in the Table -2 at Para 16.4 of
these guidelines. Similarly, the premium remitted without entering the requisite data
on NCIP shall also be returned back by the Insurance Companies. Further, the
eligible KCC Accounts for which the data entry and premium remittance has not
been done by the banks within the cut-off date will lead to farmers not getting benefit
under the scheme. Liability for all such applications and farmers shall rest with
the concerned bank branches. The Insurance Companies in case of
enrollment through their directly appointed intermediaries and the Insurance
Intermediaries/Brokers if engaged for enrollment directly through NCIP shall
also be liable to make claim payment to farmers for such applications
Accordingly the respective bank branches, Insurance Companies and
Insurance Intermediaries/Brokers shall make the eligible claim payment to the
concerned farmers. The data entry on the NCIP shall stop immediately after the
applicable cut-off date.
17.11 The concerned branches of Commercial Banks, RRBs and Nodal branch of DCCBs
in case of PACS will upload the details of individual insured farmers enrolled through
them like farmer's name, father's name, Bank Account number, Aadhaar Number,
village, categories - Small and Marginal/SC/ST/Women, insured acreage, details of
insured land, insured crop(s) etc., as prescribed in online application form available
on NCIP or CBS integration module or other digital platform like AIDE App and
submit the same within stipulated cut-off date as per the seasonality discipline.
However, any dispute in the matter may be referred to the State Governments/UT
Administrations as mentioned in Para 17.9 by the concerned agency for taking
appropriate action within the prescribed cut-off date for reconciliation of premium by
banks as outlined in the Operational Guidelines.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
67

--- Page 68 ---
17.12 Insurance Companies shall be responsible for verification and validation of requisite
information including necessary documentation in respect of non-loanee farmers
enrolled through Insurance Intermediaries or directly by employees of the Insurance
Company through web-portal or mobile App, within the stipulated date of coverage
of non-loanee farmers. Insurance Companies shall ensure that the documentation
is complete in all respects before accepting the premium. It is the responsibility of
the concerned Insurance Companies to collect/obtain any documentation of the
insured farmers from the intermediaries or other channels of enrolments, or directly
from the farmers, if necessary for verification and acceptance of application and also
to facilitate the concerned channels to re-upload and submit all requisite
documents/information on the NCIP within timelines.
17.13 Insurance Companies shall reconcile the details of individual insured farmers
uploaded on the NCIP with the consolidated challan generated and consolidated
farmers’ premium remittance done through payment gateway of the NCIP by each
Bank Branch/Nodal Bank/CSC e-Gov/other Insurance Intermediaries within the
stipulated date. Any deficiency or mismatch may be reported to concerned bank
branch/nodal bank and concerned applications shall be reverted back to the
originating source for necessary rectification. The Bank Branch or Nodal
Bank/DCCB or CSC-VLEs of insurance intermediary should further upload the
requisite correct information and desired documents in respect of such farmers for
whom clarification has been sought, immediately within 7 days. If such rectification
is not done or completed by the Bank Branch/Nodal Bank (DCCB) within the
stipulated period, Insurance Companies may reject such applications and
recommend to take necessary action to the State Governments/UT Administrations,
under intimation to GoI. The State Governments/UT Administrations in consultation
with SLBC/Nodal Authorities may recommend suitable administrative action against
such defaulting branches, banks and CSC-VLEs. However, for such erroneous
applications pertaining to loanee farmers of a bank branch or PACS, the
eligible claims (if any) in such cases shall be paid to the affected farmers by
the concerned bank branches only.
17.14 Insurance Companies shall verify and satisfy themselves about the coverage of
farmers and crops and accept the applications submitted by banks electronically
through NCIP. The insured farmer's personal details like Aadhaar Number, Banking
Details, Address, Mobile Number and all such personal details prohibited by relevant
IT Act, RBI, IRDAI or Aadhaar Act shall not be displayed or disclosed publicly.
Insurance Companies will reconcile the details of all the applications for the season,
validate the same as per the provisions of Operational Guidelines of eligibility norms
before approaching the Governments to release the final tranche of premium
subsidy under the Scheme.
17.15 All Insurance Companies shall compulsorily verify and take necessary action
including approval, rejection or reversion of applications of farmers through NCIP
within stipulated date. After stipulated period for reconciliation & obtaining further
clarifications from the concerned channels of enrolments, all pending applications of
covered farmers uploaded on NCIP shall be treated as deemed approved and the
Insurance Companies will lose their right for any further verification and validation of
such applications. However, any losses to the Government including excess
payment of premium subsidy due to delayed/non-verification of application data of
individual covered farmers as available on NCIP will be recovered from concerned
Insurance Companies only and suitable administrative action may also be taken
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
68

--- Page 69 ---
against the defaulting Insurance Companies.
17.16 The Insurance Companies are mandatorily required to follow the process and
protocol for processing of application, inception of risk and processing of claims as
detailed in the Operational Guidelines and revise or correct the applications if:
17.16.1 The KCC Loan was covered or premium was paid outside seasonality discipline.
17.16.2 Sown area was less than the insured area under a crop in a notified area
(refer Para 25).
17.16.3 Different crop other than the declared or notified was sown in the land survey no.
insured.
17.16.4 Survey number insured was not actual crop growing survey no.
17.16.5 Area insured is more than the total land holding of the farmer.
17.16.6 Multiple insurance for same crops grown on same land with multiple insurers or
through multiple banks or intermediaries.
17.16.7 The insured land parcel belongs to the other farmer but has been enrolled by some
other farmers who are not tenants or sharecroppers.
17.16.8 Total Sum insured is more than the notified sum insured for insured acreage of a
given insured crop.
17.17 Financial penalty shall be applicable on Insurance Companies if approval of
applications is not done within the stipulated time para 16.14 & 16.15.
17.18 On acceptance of applications by Insurance Companies the acknowledgement
status is updated for such applications on NCIP and gets visible to the concerned
bank branches/CSC-VLEs/Insurance Intermediaries on their login and an intimation
is sent through SMS directly to the insured farmers from NCIP. Further, the banks
can download acknowledgement receipt from NCIP using their login credentials and
may handover Acknowledgement Receipt to each insured loanee farmer within 7
days from the acceptance of applications by the concerned Insurance Company.
Similarly, the CSC-VLEs and Insurance Intermediaries can also download the
Acknowledgement Receipt from AIDE and/or NCIP and handover/share to the
farmer at the time of enrollment.
17.19 All the Insurance Companies shall ensure distribution of the acknowledgement
receipts through conventional/electronic mode to the loanee farmers in the template
approved by the GoI within a month of cut-off date for uploading of data pertaining
to farmers’ applications on NCIP. However, in case of any specific directions issued
by the GoI or the State Governments/UT Administrations regarding delivery of policy
details by physical distribution, inland-letter card or through any other mode, the
same shall be followed by the concerned Insurance Companies.
17.20 All Stakeholders shall follow all the timelines strictly as given in the Table 2 of the
Para 16.4 of these guidelines.
18 Assessment of Loss / Shortfall in Yield
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
69

--- Page 70 ---
18.1 Wide-Spread Calamities (based on season-end yield): The eligible claims on the
basis of crop yield estimation data arrived through CCEs or by using values arrived
through CCE and YES-TECH in a pre-defined proportional ratio will be considered
only if notified trigger of Threshold Yield is breached (Refer Para 20.2). The State
Governments/UTs should mandatorily conduct CCEs using either their own Mobile
App or through CCE Agri APP or unified App (under GCES) which has been
developed by GoI. The yield estimation data from State’s own Mobile App or CCE-
Agri App shall be shared through APIs to NCIP and other digital platforms of GoI
and State Govts./UTs wherever required for the purpose of crop yield estimation &
triangulation of yield data for validation and production estimates. The State
Governments/ UT nodal department shall share the final crop yield values (AY
values) obtained through the CCEs/Mobile App with all concerned Insurance
Companies in hard or soft copy to enable them to accept the same on DigiClaim
module of NCIP for the claim calculation and payment.
18.2 The Scheme operates on the basis of 'Area Approach'. The Defined Areas for each
notified crop for wide-spread calamities, i.e., the insurance unit is the Village/Village
Panchayat or any other equivalent unit for major crops and for other crops it may be
the same unit or a unit of a size higher than Village/ Village Panchayat level and
shall be decided by the SLCCCI in the respective States/UTs. Claims for widespread
crop losses on the basis of "Area Approach" will be decided by regular crop yield
estimation surveys or by adopting the Smart Sampling Methodology for crop yield
estimation and/or yield estimation through technology under YES-TECH.
Department overseeing the conduct of CCEs will submit crop yield estimation data
as per the cut-off date decided by SLCCCI, along with results of individual CCEs
(conducted using CCE Agri App) on NCIP. The yield data will be approved by the
concerned district authorities on NCIP. Final crop yield values shall also be shared
by the State/UT nodal department with all concerned Insurance Companies to
enable them to accept the same on specially developed module for the purpose on
NCIP.
18.3 CCEs shall be undertaken per crop per unit area of insurance for notified crops*, on a
sliding scale, as indicated in Table 4 below:
Sl. No. Level Minimum Sample Size
1 District 24
2 Taluka/Tehsil/Block 16
Mandal/Firka/Revenue Circle/Hobli or
3 10
any other equivalent unit
4 Village/Village Panchayat 4
*Note: Minor crops may be notified at higher than Village/Village Panchayat level.
18.4 Smart Sampling Methodology for Crop Yield Estimation
For major crops across states and with availability of technologies, the following method of
Rationalization of number of CCEs without impacting the quality of sampling and
estimation results will be adopted.
18.4.1 Smart Sampling of CCEs: Technology solutions for rationalization of CCEs based on
homogeneous selection of sample experimental plots based on crop health
condition analyzed through Remote Sensing and other New Age technological
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
70

--- Page 71 ---
solutions shall be used for rationalization of number of CCEs. For more details, refer to
Para 20.1.
18.5 Modalities for Conducting Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs)
18.5.1 In order to maintain the sanctity and credibility of CCEs as an objective method of
crop yield estimation, the modalities mentioned below will be followed:
i. To bring transparency and confidence in the data, State Governments/ UTs shall
mandatorily ensure that all the CCEs are conducted through a CCE Agri App
developed by GoI for the purpose of digitizing the process of crop yield estimation &
collation of yield data obtained through CCEs. The yield estimation data from State’s
own Mobile App or CCE-Agri App shall be shared through APIs to NCIP and other
digital platforms of GoI and State Govts./UTs wherever required for the purpose of
crop yield estimation. State/ UTs shall ensure that their Mobile Apps have all the
features, validations and specifications as maintained in CCE Agri App for the
purpose.
ii. Further, in order to encourage the primary workers of the State Governments/UT
Administrations to use mobile App for conducting the CCEs, the GoI shall provide
incentives to promote 100% usage of CCE Agri App. Every Primary Worker or Field
functionary conducting CCEs through CCE Agri-App shall be entitled for receiving
Rs.150/- per CCE as the cost towards promotion of technology which shall be given
by GoI, after the approval of the individual CCEs by the respective State
Administration.
iii. Where the State Governments/UT Administrations are also willing to pay any
amount to their workers from their resources, the same shall be over and above the
amount paid by GoI.
iv. The existing system of incentivization in the form of reimbursement for the purchase
of smart phone, data charges, and expenses on outsourcing of CCEs shall be
discontinued with the onboarding of new system of incentivizing the primary worker
upfront, however, past liabilities shall be settled.
(Note: Para 18.4.1 shall come into effect from the date of issue of specific
SOP/Guidelines in this regard)
18.5.2 If the State/UTs do not conduct their Crop Cutting Experiments through the CCE-
Agri app, then additional weightage shall be assigned to the technology derived yield
estimates, as defined in Para 20.3.2 i.e., Yield Estimation System Based on
technology (YES-TECH), of these guidelines.
18.5.3 CCE experimental plots shall be chosen using smart sampling technology for
selected major crops and conventional random sampling for other crops and the
secrecy of the selected plot, subject to disclosure to relevant stakeholders
under these Guidelines, should be maintained by all concerned until the CCE
is actually conducted in order to rule out potential moral hazards. States/UTs
may continue to estimate the crop yield by adopting General Crop Estimation Survey
(GCES) for estimation of crop production, as recommended by Department of
Economics & Statistics, GoI. However, the States/ UTs shall keep the CCEs to be
conducted under General Crop Estimation Survey (GCES) separate from CCEs
conducted under PMFBY and accordingly prepare separate plan for CCEs to be
conducted under GCES and CCEs to be conducted under PMFBY.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
71

--- Page 72 ---
18.5.4 In case few experiments under GCES also falls in the IUs under PMFBY, the results
of such experiments shall be accepted for use under crop yield estimation for the
scheme and therefore only balance CCEs shall be conducted under the scheme for
arriving at estimated yield value for the crop in given IU provided that the sampling
methodology for selection of experimental plots under PMFBY is also based on
random sampling.
18.5.5 In case of sampling methodology being SST, complete CCEs as required for the
given IU shall be conducted using the SST method only. In other words, in a
particular insurance unit, all the requisite experimental field plots for conducting
CCEs shall either be selected using SST or using Random Number Sampling
Method to avoid sampling error.
18.5.6 A comprehensive manual for Crop Cutting Experiments for Crop Yield Estimation
has also been developed by the GoI in consultation with NSSO, IASRI and the
respective State Governments/UT Administrations.
18.5.7 The GoI shall notify the CCE Manual 2023 and the same shall be followed by the
States/UTs for conducting CCEs under PMFBY.
18.5.8 In order to provide proper benefits to the farmers and to compensate them as per
near actual loss experience, crop(s) shall be notified at the lowest level i.e.
Village/Village Panchayat as detailed in Para 18.2.
18.5.9 State/UTs shall strengthen the audit process of the conduct of CCEs, with necessary
checks and balances. Digitizing the CCE process including geo-coding (providing
the latitude and longitude of the CCE location), date/ time- stamping and taking
photographs (of the CCE plot and CCE activity), is a must for all CCEs being
conducted.
18.5.10 Wherever external agencies are proposed to be used by the State Governments/UT
Administrations for conduct of CCEs (i.e. CCEs are outsourced), it should be given
only to the registered 'professional/accredited' agencies with adequate experience
in the agricultural field activities or yield estimation. It is mandatory for these
agencies to follow the digital protocol as mentioned in the Para 18.4. Services of
such agencies may also be utilized by the States/UTs for assessment of localized
losses and losses due to post-harvest risks.
18.5.11 District level Steering Committee: State/UT Government shall compulsorily
constitute a Steering committee in each district to plan, conduct and supervise the
CCEs for yield assessment and to provide reports of yield data to the State/UT Nodal
department. The Steering committee should be headed by the District level Head of
the Department/Organization responsible for conducting CCEs and District
Agriculture/Cooperative officers, representatives of NSSO and Insurance
Companies as members. The Steering committee will compulsorily associate the
representatives of Insurance Companies, NSSO, so that they shall be well informed
about each and every activity and obtain the requisite information about CCE
planning, schedule for conducting CCEs, selection of CCEs plot, sharing of requisite
form 2, form 8 etc. and individual CCE result etc. The Head of Steering Committee
will be responsible for uploading all requisite information on NCIP i.e. CCE schedule,
individual CCE report etc. and imparting training to field functionaries responsible
for conducting CCEs. Steering Committee will compulsorily send all their
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
72

--- Page 73 ---
proceedings / minutes etc. to District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC) and Nodal
officer of the State. Concerned Insurance Companies shall compulsorily deploy one
well conversant official at the office of the Head of the Steering Committee for at
least 3 months of the harvesting period for better coordination and obtaining the
information of CCEs including CCEs Schedules etc. Concerned Insurance
Companies shall nominate their representatives in the steering committee well in
advance and also share personal details, contacts, email ID etc. to the nodal
departments of the States/UTs while ensuring that the GoI is intimated. It is the
responsibility of this designated officer of Insurance Company to obtain the plan &
detailed schedules of each CCE from the concerned district administration officers
at the Block/Tehsil/Circle level within that district. District Administration will provide
requisite space and logistics at their office for the insurance company official.
States/UTs will provide the granular information related to schedule of CCEs to the
nominated Insurance Company official only. Any delay/non-receipt of information
shall be communicated by the nominated official only in the concerned district to the
steering committee at the earliest but no later than 7 days of the due scheduled date.
The copy of the reminder to the steering committee will compulsorily be forwarded
to nodal department of the States/UTs & GoI. Steering committee may also form
Electronic/Social Media groups for quick communication about their plan, schedules
and activities etc.
18.5.12 In instances where required number of CCEs could not be conducted due to non-
availability of adequate cropped area, adverse weather conditions or inadequate
infrastructure etc., the yield estimate for such IUs can be generated by using
methods such as:
i. Adopting yield estimate of next higher unit, or
ii. Adopting the yield of a neighboring IU with maximum correlation.
Priority of applicability of aforesaid two methods should be notified by the concerned
States/UTs in the notification itself, failing which the option of yield estimate of next
higher unit would be considered as default. However, this clause shall only be
applicable in unavoidable situations and shall be limited to only minimal number of
IU units. It cannot be made a general rule to avoid CCEs. Special efforts should be
made by the States/UTs to conduct adequate number of CCEs in all notified units in
order to provide appropriate benefits to farmers. However, if State/UTs fail to
submit/approve the CCE data within prescribed time then claims will be settled
based on the yield data generated using technology.
18.5.13 Modalities for Conducting CCEs for Multi-Picking Crops
In case of multi-picking crops e.g. Cotton, Chilly, Tobacco, Tomato, Pea, Fruits
(Mango & Apples) & other crops of similar nature, the following procedure shall be
followed:
18.5.13.1 States/UTs shall, in the beginning, specify the number of required picking for each
crop both for irrigated and un-irrigated (rainfed) conditions. Ideally it should be as
per the NSO/Indian Agricultural Statistic Research Institute (IASRI) defined
guidelines. If it is not available, States/UTs in consultation with State Agriculture
Universities and concerned ICAR center may identify the required number of
pickings. However, as number of actual pickings depends on climatic conditions etc.,
hence possibility of further pickings, at each picking shall compulsorily be recorded
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
73

--- Page 74 ---
in CCE Agri App and the number of actual pickings will be final in such cases.
18.5.13.2 If the required number of CCEs have been done but the required number of pickings
have not been done, then for those experiments, statistical factor needs to be used
to extrapolate yield to calculate the final yield.
18.5.13.3 Such statistical factor (proportion of picking wise yield) needs to be computed from
well conducted CCEs (with the required number of pickings) from the same Taluka
separately from Irrigated and Un-irrigated (rainfed) condition. At least data of 5 well
conducted CCE should be used for computing the factors.
An Example for Yield Calculation for multi-picking crop is mentioned in Table 5 below:
Picking Picking 4 Total
Picking 2 Picking 3
1 Yield Yield Yield
Yield (kg) Yield (kg)
Crop Experiment no. (kg) (kg) (Kg)
∑P1,P2,
P1 P2 P3 P4
P3,P4
Well Conducted CCEs in the Taluka with 4 pickings
Cotton E1 1 1.95 2.1 1.25 6.3
Cotton E2 1 2 1.75 1.4 6.15
Cotton E3 0.75 1.75 1.5 1.5 5.5
Cotton E4 0.8 1.43 2.15 1.4 5.78
Cotton E5 0.95 1.85 1.4 0.75 4.95
Average 0.9 1.8 1.78 1.26 5.74
Factor (Total 6.373# 2.128# 1.282#
Yield/ Picking
(1st) (1st + 2nd) (1st+2nd+3rd)
Yield)
CCEs with Less Pickings in any IU within that Taluka
E6 (only 1st
Cotton 1 6.373#
Picking)
E7 (only 1st & 2nd
Cotton 1.2 1.75 6.278#
Picking)
E8 (only 1st , 2nd &
Cotton 1.1 1.85 1.57 5.795#
3rd Picking)
Note: # The factor has been computed as the ratio of average total yield and
average yield upto that picking.
18.5.13.4 In case there is dispute regarding large deviation in picking dates, the average
picking dates should be computed from well conducted CCEs at the Taluka level.
Accordingly, the picking dates and numbers will be adjusted. For example, if the
average picking date for second picking in a particular Taluka is in December and
one experiment has shown first picking in December, it will be considered as second
picking.
18.5.13.5 If there is no proper CCE (with required number of pickings) even at the Taluka level,
it should be considered that no CCE is available and the procedure defined in yield
dispute SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) should be followed, i.e. yield should
be estimated using technology-based approach. In case the crop has withered and
there is no further possibility of having further pickings, the same shall be recorded
compulsorily in the mobile application/CCE-Agri App while conducting the current
picking experiment. In such cases, no multiplication factor may be used for
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
74

--- Page 75 ---
calculation of Actual Yield.
18.5.13.6 All claims will be settled exclusively on the basis of CCE based yield data available
on the NCIP or a combination of the CCE based yields and YES-TECH derived
yields, as the case may be. The Actual Yield Data at Crop-IU level shall be
automatically synchronized with the NCIP through the CCE Agri App. Once the
Actual Yield data is available on the NCIP, the same shall be verified, uploaded and
approved by the concerned District/State authorities on NCIP. For those
experiments which were conducted offline without usage of mobile application due
to unforeseen circumstances, the Actual Yield data, along with the location
information shall be uploaded and approved by the concerned District administration
or State/UT nodal department on the NCIP. However, this shall be an exception and
should be exercised in rare cases and such CCEs should not exceed 5% of the total
CCEs. Actual Yield data through any other mode other than the NCIP shall not be
accepted. If the yield data is not uploaded and approved within pre-defined cut-off
date by the concerned authority/department, the concerned Insurance Company,
may inform the State/UT and the GoI well in time to initiate appropriate corrective
action.
18.5.13.7 Insurance Companies should be given complete access to co-witness the CCEs,
the digital images of the CCEs and relevant data in the requisite format
(electronic/physical) by the State/UT Government on a real-time basis. A schedule
should be formally given/shared with nominated representatives of Insurance
Companies who are also part of the Steering Committee, sufficiently in advance
without fail to help them coordinate with the field functionaries and mobilize their
manpower accordingly. For this purpose, the Insurance Companies shall
permanently station one representative in the Steering Committee at the concerned
district office of the department/agency mandated to conduct CCEs for proper day
to day liaison (Para 18.5.11). State and District administration shall also provide
necessary space in the concerned office & facilitate sharing of information related to
conduct of CCEs. The State/UT may not provide any documents such as Form-1,
Form-2 etc. to the Insurance Companies, however, the State/UT should provide
facility for physical verification of documents like Form-1, Form-2 etc. on request of
Insurance Companies at their premises.
19 Dispute resolution regarding Yield Data/Crop Loss Data
19.1 During the earlier years of implementation of PMFBY, various types of yield disputes
were observed, leading to unnecessary delays in the claim settlement. The following
chart shows the procedures to be adopted in various cases.
Chart: Procedures to be followed in different yield dispute cases
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
75

--- Page 76 ---
19.2 Wherever the yield estimates reported at IU level are abnormally low or high vis-à-
vis the general crop condition the Insurance Companies in consultation with
State/UT Government can make use of various technology solutions (e.g. Satellite
based vegetation or other indices, weather parameters, etc.) or other technologies
(including statistical analysis, crop models etc.) to confirm the yield estimates. If the
Insurance Company witnesses any anomaly or deficiency in the mid-season yield
assessment and/or CCE based actual yield data (partial /consolidated) received
from the State/UT Government, the same shall be brought into the notice of
concerned State/UT department within 7 days from date of receipt of yield data with
specific observations/remarks providing intimation to the GoI and anomaly, if any,
may be resolved in the next 7 days by the Head of the Nodal Department for
State/UT Government. If the dispute is not resolved, the aggrieved party may file an
appeal with the State Level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC) for dispute
resolution (Constitution of STAC is defined in Para 19.5) to pass a speaking order.
A suggestive checklist for STAC to mandatorily follow while deciding on the
crop yield disputes is annexed at Annexure-IV of these guidelines. In case the
matter stands unresolved even after examination by STAC, the aggrieved party may
file an appeal with the Central Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of GoI, in the
prescribed format, along with all relevant data & documents, including minutes of
the meetings of STAC and checklist as above, as per the conditions specified in
Para 19.7.1. However, data with anomalies which is not reported within 7 days
shall be treated as accepted to the Insurance Company. The protocol of the
timelines defined above shall also be applicable to the actual Yield data being
provided by the concerned State department in batches, i.e. Crop-wise-District-wise
lots of data and timelines for each batch of data shall be counted separately/batch
wise. Unnecessary delay in the finalization of yield data will attract penal interest on
due claim amount payable to the farmers as per the provisions mentioned at Para
16.14 & 16.15.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
76

--- Page 77 ---
19.3 The existing Central TAC comprising of representatives from the DES, DA&FW,
Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC), National Statistical
Organization (NSO), Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute (IASRI), shall
be further augmented and constituted under the chairpersonship of Additional
Secretary, DA&FW. Additional members on case to case basis may be drawn from
various organizations namely, relevant institution under Indian Council of Agriculture
Research (ICAR), Indian Agriculture Research Institute (IARI), National Remote
Sensing Centre (NRSC), Space Applications Centre (SAC), Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National
Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD), India Meteorological
Department (IMD), MITR of the Concerned State/UT or any other such organization
as may be deemed fit by the chairperson of the committee.
19.4 The Central TAC shall review all technical matters related to the execution of the
Scheme. In case, the matter requires further focused deliberations, the Central TAC
will refer the issue to the Technical Agency (TA) (refer Para 19.7.2). The TA will
compulsorily take the inputs/reports/relevant information from the concerned
State/UT Department and Insurance Company and may also opt for representatives
of other organizations/experts (if required) with the permission of chairperson of the
Central TAC and follow the procedure as defined in the SOP.
19.5 State shall also constitute the State/UT Level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC)
on a similar pattern to resolve disputes. The STAC may be chaired by the Principal
Secretary/Secretary/Additional Chief Secretary of the concerned Department with
members from State Agricultural University, State Remote Sensing Application
Center, IMD (state center), DES, any ICAR center in the State/UT, NSO, and
concerned MITR etc. However, in case of disagreement between the concerned
parties, the case may be referred to the Central TAC along with recommendations
and findings for further deliberation/examination and decision.
19.6 TAC/TA/STAC shall deliberate and examine the subject matter and indicate their
views/decisions based on statistical/technological inputs and other related scientific
and technical parameters as detailed in the SOP.
19.7 The SOP to deal with Yield Assessment dispute cases is as under
19.7.1 When to use this SOP: This SOP shall be followed only when there is a dispute
about the crop yield values between the State/UT Government and Insurance
Company/ies and in the case when it remains unresolved at the Head of the Nodal
Department level and STAC (Para 19.2) and has been referred to the Central
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), which in turn decides that the matter needs
to be referred to a Technical Agency (TA). The dispute can be brought to the TAC,
only in the case, where all of the following conditions are satisfied. All cases not
falling in these criteria shall be decided by the head of Nodal Department with the
approval of competent authority and their decision shall be final and binding on all
concerned.
 There is more than 25% difference between the yield estimated by the State/UT
Government and the Insurance Company.
 There is sufficient documentary evidence that the mid-season yield assessment
and/or CCEs have not been conducted in the required numbers and as per the
standard protocol, in at least 20% IUs for a particular crop in a given district or 20%
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
77

--- Page 78 ---
of total planned loss assessment surveys/CCEs for the particular crop in the given
district.
 The matter has been considered by STAC but could not be resolved at the State/UT
level.
 The Insurance Company has already carried out the technical analysis of the data
in consultation of the State Government/UT Administration or in collaboration with
Central/State/empaneled agencies and has used satellite/model/ weather data to
support its objection.
19.7.2 The Organizations to which TAC can refer the case: The organizations can be the
Central Government or autonomous organizations, which have requisite capacity to
carry out such analyses, such as: MNCFC (DA&FW), SAC (ISRO), NRSC (ISRO),
empaneled MITRs and other similar government organizations as decided by
Central TAC. Hereafter, these organizations will be referred to as Technical Agencies
(TA).
19.7.3 Data to be provided by State/UT Government to TA:
 All crop loss assessment surveys or yield assessment survey or CCE data of the
contested area, in digital/soft format, along with photographs and other collateral
data, as collected during yield assessment survey or CCEs. The yield assessment
survey or CCE data should ideally be geo referenced.
 Village level crop area estimates.
 Long term (at least 10 years) data of crop yield at GP level (if not available, at least
at Taluka/block level) in digital format, (preferably Excel).
 Long term (at least 10 years) data of weather parameters (daily or weekly) at GP
level (if not available, at least at Taluka /block level). The weather parameters should
cover at least, rainfall, rainy days and temperature, in digital/soft format, (preferably
Excel).
 Any information about pest/disease attack, hailstorm, cyclones, inundations, heavy
rainfall or any other natural/ manmade disasters in that area.
 Report of any analysis carried out by the State/UT to support its claim.
19.7.4 Data to be provided by Insurance Company:
 Data of the co-observed crop loss assessment surveys or yield assessment survey
or CCEs collected by Insurance Companies in digital/soft format, along with
photographs and other collateral data, as collected during yield assessment survey
or CCE.
 Data of weather observatories*, if maintained or sourced by Insurance Company, in
the contested area.
 Report of the technical studies* carried out by the Insurance Company to support its
claim.
 Detailed reasons for the yield data being perceived as contested.
 Any UAV data/output collected from the contested area.
(*This data shall only be considered where government approved agency /
empaneled agency has been used Para 2.20).
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
78

--- Page 79 ---
19.7.5 Analysis to be carried out by the Technical Agency:
Among the steps given below, any 3 steps should be followed from (a) to (d) and
any one step should be followed from (e) to (f). The steps in (g) and (h) are
compulsory.
a) Statistical analysis of the yield assessment survey and/or CCE yield data:
Basic Statistical Parameters (Mean, Variance, Coefficient of Variation (CV), Range,
Standard Error, etc.) Scatter plots, Test of Normality (Shapiro-Wilk test, Quartile-
Quartile plot, box and Whisker plot, Skewness and Kurtosis, etc.). It also needs to
be checked whether yield assessment survey or CCEs were done using the proper
sampling design. Village level crop area may also be checked to identify reasons for
inadequate number of yield assessment survey or CCE.
b) Analysis of Weather Data: Weekly Rainfall Deviations (at least at block level) or at
grid level using gridded or satellite-based data, Dry-spell Occurrence, Temperature
Anomaly, Soil Moisture Analysis (either from satellite or model data) and any other
available weather parameters (related to crop condition), either from ground or
satellite data. Another rainfall-based index, which can also be studied, is
Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI).
SPI can be developed using WINDS data and/or IMD gridded rainfall data or
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate Prediction Centre (NOAA
CPC) rainfall data. However, while using gridded data (either from satellite or ground
stations), appropriate resolution should be used at appropriate level. For example,
0.25 degree data should be used only at the district level and not at the block/village
level. High resolution weather data can also be sourced from weather companies.
c) Analysis of Long-term Yield Data: Analysis of previous 10 years' yield data (at
GP or Taluka level) shall be carried out to assess the variations in yield data. The
analysis should include yield ranges, mean yield, standard deviation, and CV.
d) Analysis of Other collateral data: Other data or reports, which should be
considered, include Crop Weather Watch Report (DES, DA&FW),NSSO Supervised
yield assessment survey or CCE data, Forecasting Agriculture Output using Space
Agrometeorology and Land Based Observations (FASAL) program crop reports,
drought assessment reports prepared by MNCFC, Market arrivals and prices data
for 2-3 years (http://agmarknet.gov.in/), crop condition data available on VEDAS
platform (https://vedas.sac.gov.in/vedas/), Disaster maps from Bhuvan platform,
IMD weather bulletins, weather information/ forecasts available on MOSDAC
(https://www.mosdac.gov.in/), etc.
e) Analysis of Vegetation Index from Satellite Data: The vegetation indices, which
can be used for this purpose are Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI),
Normalized Difference Wetness Index (NDWI), Vegetation Condition Index (VCI),
Temperature Condition Index (TCI), Vegetation Health Index (VHI), Enhance
Vegetation Index (EVI), etc. To derive these indices, satellite data of appropriate
resolution should be used (Table 6).
Table 6: Types of resolution to be used for vegetation index derivation for different
levels of analysis
Level of Spatial Resolution
Examples of Satellite/Sensor
Analysis to be used
Resourcesat 2/2A: Linear Imaging Self Scanning Sensor
Village level 5-30 m or better
(LISS) IV (5.8m)/LISS III (23.5m) , Sentinel 2:MSI (10 m);
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
79

--- Page 80 ---
Rapid Eye (6.5 m); SPOT 5 HRG (5,10 m), LandSat 8 OLI
(30m).
Block/Tehsil Resourcesat 2/2A: LISS III (23.5 m), Landsat 8: OLI (30m);
10-60 m
level Sentinel 2:MSI (10 m); Resourcesat 2/2A: AWIFS (56m).
Resourcesat 2/2A: AWiFS (56 m); Proba V (100 m),
District level 50-500 m
MODIS (250m/500m) or any other satellite.
However, wherever long-term satellite data is needed, Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer (MODIS) (250 m/500m) data can be used, but it should not be
used for village level information. Ideally for deriving crop specific vegetation indices,
crop maps should be overlaid on the data. Generally, for few major crops, crop maps
are prepared under FASAL project of GoI. Crop maps can be generated using either
optical or microwave remote sensing Synthetic Aperture Data (SAR) data of
appropriate resolution. Wherever, crop maps are not available, agricultural area map
should be used. Agricultural area map can be obtained from the Land Use (LU)/Land
Cover (LC*) available with NRSC or SRSCs. For assessing NDVI or NDWI deviation
percentage, data of latest 2-3 years should be used or at least data of a normal crop
year should be used.
f) Crop Growth Modelling: Yield loss estimates can be made using crop simulation
models such as Decision Support System for Agro-Technology Transfer (DSSAT)/
Info Crop, etc., or the models recommended in the YES-TECH Manual 2023.
However, care should be taken to use well calibrated and validated models and also
models should be run in at higher spatial resolution, at least 5 km. Crop
Growth/Simulation models should be assimilated with remote sensing products (e.g.
crop map, phenology, Leaf Area Index (LAI), etc.)
g) Identification of Outliers: All these above analyses can be used to check whether
there was any reason for yield deviation as presented in the yield assessment survey
or CCE data. Then a yield proxy map may be prepared. The Yield proxy map can
be derived from remote sensing vegetation indices (single or combination of
indices), crop simulation model output, remote sensing based semi-physical models
or an integration of various parameters which are related to crop yield, such as soil,
weather (gridded), satellite-based products, etc. Whatever yield proxies to be used,
it is the responsibility of the TA to record documentary evidence (from their or other's
published work) that the yield proxy is related to the particular crop's yield. Then the
IU level yields need to be overlaid on the yield proxy map. Both yield proxy and yield
assessment survey or CCE yield can be divided into 4-5 categories (e.g. Very good,
Good, Medium, Poor, Very poor). Wherever there is large mismatch between yield
proxy and the yield assessment survey or CCE yield (more than 2 levels), the yield
assessment survey or CCE yield for that IU can be considered, as outliers.
h) Computing Yield for the Outliers: For the IUs, where the yield was considered as
outlier, the yield may be estimated by developing empirical models (statistically
significant, with low Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between long-term yield data
(at IU level or, if not available, higher administrative level) and weather and remote
sensing-based index data. If good quality long-term data is not available or if the
model is not significant, when using time series data for an administrative unit
(GP/Mandal/Hobli/ Block/Taluk/Revenue Circle etc.), the model can also be
developed using the previous 1-2 years' data across the IUs/administrative unit,
within a district. Using these models, yield for the concerned year should be
estimated. The estimates of only statistically significant models (p-value < 0.1) will
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
80

--- Page 81 ---
be considered. RMSE (%) of the Yield estimated from the model estimates, in
comparison with the actual historical yield should preferably be less than 30%. The
final yield estimate will be a combination of yield assessment survey or CCE
(whatever experiments available) estimates and technology estimates. The
estimates will be combined by giving weightage to the inverse of the errors of the
estimates. If the model was not statistically significant, the average of estimated
yields of adjacent blocks should be used (Note: Each and every case may have
specific and special cause related to a problem and may not be considered as a
reference for any other case.) Each time, the stage of the crop should be given prior
importance e.g. 10 mm rainfall at vegetative stage and at harvest or post-harvest
stage has different impacts; a small amount rainfall having devastating wind-speed
have different impact than high amount of rainfall having calm or no-wind. The TA
needs to take into account all these factors to consider each of the cases as an
individual and special case.
19.7.6 Time required for the analysis: The analysis needs to be completed by the
concerned TA, within one month of receipt of all mentioned data from the Insurance
Company and the State/UT Government.
19.7.7 Funds needed for the analysis: All the analysis will be carried out by the TA, with its
existing resources. However, if there is any need of procurement of priced data or
services, this may be funded by the concerned Insurance Company or the State/UT
Government, whichever organization has brought the dispute issue up to TAC.
19.7.8 Support to Technical Agency: The TA, if required, can take the support from the
experts of SRSCs and SAUs. For this the State Agriculture Department will issue
required instructions to concerned experts/agencies. A concerned officer of the
PMFBY, CPMU will coordinate between the TA and the State/UT.
19.7.9 General Suggestions: Though this SOP identifies the procedure for yield dispute
resolutions, in the long run, it will benefit the scheme and the farmers, if there is no
dispute. The following suggestions are made to avoid dispute:
 The State/UTs shall conduct the crop loss assessment survey and crop yield
assessment survey though CCEs following the standard procedure (proper
sampling plan) and collect the data using Crop Survey App & CCE-Agri App
respectively.
 State/UTs need to pro-actively use technology for more accurate crop yield
estimation.
 State/UTs should develop mechanism to resolve disputes at the State/UT level
through STAC by using the technical support from State/UT level organizations,
such as Agricultural Universities, SRSCs, and ICAR Centers located in the State/UT,
local IMD office, etc.
 The Insurance Companies should proactively, get involved with the State/UTs for
supervision of yield assessment survey and CCEs.
 The Insurance Companies should increasingly invest in the use of technology to
support the loss assessment.
 There should be better coordination between the State/UTs and the Insurance
Companies.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
81

--- Page 82 ---
20 Use of Innovative Technologies in Yield Estimation
20.1 Rationalization of CCEs - Smart Sampling Technique (SST)
20.1.1 It is observed that concerns regarding crop yield estimation in the insurance units are
increasing and thereby reducing the efficiency of the crop insurance mechanism.
Disputes on the quality of yield data is a challenge in the effective implementation of
the Scheme. Technology interventions are highly recommended from time to time to
bring improvements in the crop yield assessment. Under these guidelines,
implementation of SST is mandatory for improving the CCE field's selection. Through
smart sampling, the CCE fields in each insurance unit can be selected based on the
yield proxy index, thus accounting for the spatial variability in crop yield. The primary
and the unique advantage of this technique is achieving improved distribution of
CCEs in the notified IUs thereby leading to more representative yield estimates
compared to conventional random sampling approach. Crop condition and crop risks
occurrence, if any, during major part of the season are taken into account while
developing a-priori yield proxy. The add-on benefits of smart sampling include:
a) Notification of CCE locations only a few days before harvest, thus maintaining the
secrecy of plots and minimizing moral hazards and
b) Identification of CCE locations through digital map base, thus minimizing human
bias/preferences in locating the fields. Digital database of CCE facilitates linking of
CCE data with satellite data and different thematic datasets.
20.1.2 The two important input data layers for implementing smart sampling are crop map
and crop yield proxy map in digital form in moderate to high spatial resolution.
20.1.2.1 Crop map: Satellite derived accurate crop map is a pre-requisite for smart sampling.
Crop mapping accuracy depends on many aspects, which include:
a) spatial resolution of satellite data vis-à-vis the field size,
b) the spectral bands being used for classification,
c) the classification algorithm,
d) the cropping pattern (mono cropping or mixed cropping) and
e) granularity and quality of the ground truth data used in analysis of satellite data.
Both commission error (e.g. non-paddy areas represented as paddy) and omission
error (e.g. paddy fields are represented as non-paddy) would affect the efficiency of
smart sampling. Satellite data of 10-30 m spatial resolution and crop mapping
accuracy more than 80% are recommended for generating crop map for Smart
Sampling.
20.1.2.2 Crop yield proxy map: Ability of the yield proxy to capture the spatial variability of
yield within the IU largely determines the efficiency of Smart sampling technique.
GoI has developed a protocol for yield proxy generation as part of the CCE Manual.
The details of yield proxy generation using multiple satellite, weather and ground
data are provided in the protocol. The yield proxy defined in the protocol is available
in 10-30 m resolution, which has higher accuracy for yield estimation, as shown in
various pilot studies. State/UTs may adopt that method for yield proxy generation.
The yield proxy layer has to be generated in time, preferably 30 days and not later
than 20 days before harvest time.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
82

--- Page 83 ---
20.1.3 Selection of CCE fields: The Crop map should be co-registered with the Yield proxy
map and overlaid on it. Density slicing based on 4-6 quantiles (divide the frequency
distribution in equal proportion) should be carried out for the yield proxy of each
district/block (6 classes are taken if stratification is done at district level and 4 classes
are made if stratification is done at Block/Tehsil level). IU Boundaries are overlaid
and for each IU 2-3 major classes are considered. 4 locations (primary) are randomly
selected from these classes, proportionate to number of pixels under each class.
For each point, 2 additional points (secondary and tertiary) are selected from the
same class, as reserve. For each point, the latitude/longitude, class category, GP
name, Taluka and District names are to be provided to the SRSCs. Field survey
numbers corresponding to each location are to be identified by SRSC using
cadastral maps and provided to the field functionaries at least 5-days before
harvesting. Wherever cadastral map is not available, geographical locations
(Latitude and Longitude) of the fields are to be given to the field functionaries, who
can locate using any navigation App.
20.1.4 Crops to be covered: SST for CCE fields selection may be implemented for the
notified crops, wherever satellite-based crop mapping and multi-index-based yield
proxy layer generation are made available by MNCFC. Generally, it is recommended
for main crops like Paddy, Wheat, Jowar, Mustard, Cotton etc., since the procedures
for generating the above inputs are fairly operational. For other crops,
methodologies are to be standardized and the State/UTs are advised to undertake
such Research & Development (R&D) studies for standardization of approaches so
that a greater number of crops can be brought under the purview of smart sampling.
20.1.5 Variable Methodology: Selection of right data and right techniques of analysis for
crop mapping and crop yield proxy generation determines the efficiency of smart
sampling. One methodology with one set of inputs for all regions and crops may not
work. Diverse crop growing environments may need using different methods for
different regions. One has to check for the robustness of the methodology by applying
certain quality parameters such as sensitivity of crop yield proxy and accuracy of crop
layer using ground truth or secondary data.
20.1.6 Accordingly, the State/UTs are required to share the list of district wise crop calendar
including harvesting window (i.e. Start Date and End Date) for Kharif and Rabi crops
for the implementation of SST. In this regard the following shall be followed:
20.1.6.1 The State/UTs shall select and notify the districts and crops for the implementation
of SST and no other sampling method shall be used for these districts and crops for
conducting CCEs. However, the State/UTs may have a separate set of CCEs for
GCES.
20.1.6.2 MNCFC will be the nodal agency for SST implementation in coordination with the
State Remote Sensing Centers (SRSCs). The State/UTs must bring the SRSCs
onboard for SST implementation especially for providing village boundaries, location
of SST for identification of plot etc.
20.1.6.3 The State/UTs shall provide the following information to MNCFC for generation of
SST points:
i. List of Districts and Crops for implementation of SST as part of the notification itself.
ii. 100 Ground Truth (GT) points of the identified Crops in the District, One Month
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
83

--- Page 84 ---
before the start of the harvesting season.
iii. Boundaries of the Insurance Units in vector format (Shapefiles).
20.1.6.4 Location of SST based CCEs shall be shared by MNCFC with the concerned
State/UT Agriculture Department 15 days before the harvesting period, as notified
in the crop calendar as latest by the timelines mention at Table 2 of Para 16.4 of
these guidelines.
20.1.7 State/UTs are advised to make suitable preparedness to ensure implementation of
SST for selection of CCE plots for the selected Districts/Crops and must work in
close Coordination with the MNCFC, as any delay in providing the requested data
to MNCFC will result in generation of SST points.
20.2 Direct Yield Estimation through Technology
20.2.1 Yield Estimation System Based on Technology (YES-TECH)
20.2.1.1 For addressing the issue of reliability of CCE based crop yield assessment in terms
of their accuracy, representativeness and timeliness, it was envisaged that
innovative technologies such as satellite remote sensing, drone, data modeling,
AWS/ARG, Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning (AI&ML) real time analytics &
transmission of data etc. shall be utilized. This will ensure accurate assessment of
yield and timely payment of claims to farmers. Various studies carried out by national
and international organizations, including MNCFC, NRSC, SAC, Research Program
on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), International Rice
Research Institute (IRRI), International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
World Bank, etc. have shown that the use of satellite, weather, soil and crop data,
along with images/video capture of crop growth at various stages and accurate
sample CCE data collection can improve the yield data quality/timeliness and
support timely claim processing and payments.
20.2.1.2 The GoI, with the support of national/international centers as mentioned in Para
20.2.1.1 above, SRSCs and SAUs, initiated pilot studies on technology-based crop
yield estimation using technology and a small number of good quality CCEs as
ground truth for model calibration and validation. The results of these pilot studies
have been evaluated and recommended for up scaling at national level.
20.2.1.3 Accordingly, the GoI has initiated nation-wide rollout of Yield Estimation System
based on Technology (YES-TECH), from Kharif 2023 season onwards, towards
enabling large scale adoption of technology-based yield estimates for yield loss and
insurance claim assessments under PMFBY.
20.2.1.4 YES-TECH Manual 2023 has been notified by the GoI and all the provisions of the
said manual, as amended from time to time, shall be applicable to the scheme.
20.2.1.5 Technology-based yield estimation shall be implemented on graded scale i.e.,
minimum 30% weightage to technology driven yield estimates in the first year along
with 70% to traditional Crop Cutting Experiments approach. Gradual increase of
10%-20% thereafter will be made based on the experience of stakeholders.
However, the State/UTs may opt for increasing the percentage and give higher
weightage to the technology derived yield estimates from Kharif 2023 itself.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
84

--- Page 85 ---
20.2.1.6 The concept of assigning the weightage to technology is being roped in for reducing
the moral hazards & increasing objectivity, however the conventional CCEs (to be
captured through CCE-Agri app) will continue to be conducted as being done
presently.
20.2.1.7 The weightage to technology shall be increased in the following manner if State/UTs
do not conduct their Crop Cutting Experiments through the CCE-Agri app:
% of CCE conducted through app w.r.t. total CCEs
Weightage to technology
conducted in a district
>75% 30%
>50% but < or =75% 35%
>25% but < or =50% 40%
>10% but < or =25% 45%
< 10% 50%
20.2.1.8 State/UTs will be assisted by the following entities in implementation of YES-TECH:
i. Mentor Institutes for Technology Rollout (MITR) shall supervise the adoption and
implementation of technical approaches for yield assessment. These mentor
institutions may be National level Technology institutions (Like NRSC, SAC, ICAR
etc.), State Agriculture Universities, State Remote Sensing Centre or any other such
institution.
ii. Technology Implementation Partner (TIP) shall be the agency that shall run the
models finalized by the respective State/UT. TIP can be a private sector player or
even a suitably qualified public institution. State/UTs shall choose TIP but to be
selected as a TIP they will have to be technically empaneled by the YES-TECH
Committee.
iii. The MITRs, TIPs and other stakeholders shall follow all relevant provisions of YES-
TECH manual 2023, as amended from time to time.
20.2.1.9 Cost of implementing the YES-TECH component would be shared between the GoI
and the State/UT Government on sunset basis as under:
Sharing Ratio/Pattern between Central and State
Governments/UT Administrations for YES-TECH
Particulars
2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27
(1st year) (2nd year) (3rd year) onwards
North-eastern and As per
1 90:10 90:10 90:10
Himalayan States/Uts subsidy
sharing
2. Other States/UTs 90:10 80:20 60:40
pattern
20.2.2 Collection of Real-time Photos and Observations of Crops (CROPIC)
20.2.2.1 Under this initiative, crop health will be monitored by taking periodic photos of
standing or peril-affected crops at pre-determined interval of its growth with GPS
coordinates, three to five times during the season for assessing the crop condition
at different stages of the crop cycle.
20.2.2.2 This will also greatly help in reducing the moral hazard as availability of periodic
photos of crop health will ensure that there is suitable data available to validate a
sudden and precipitous fall in yield at the time of the CCE.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
85

--- Page 86 ---
20.2.2.3 Further, this data can subsequently be analyzed using AI/ML tools to further
augment the YES-TECH models.
20.2.2.4 The use of CROPIC Mobile App for collection of crop photographs shall be
mandatory for Insurance Companies and State Governments/UTs. Other rural
channels viz. Krishi Sakhi, Bima Mitras etc. may also be engaged in the collection
of crop photographs. The same may be made optional for farmers to crowd-source
the crop photographs.
20.2.2.5 Monetary incentive of Rs. 10/- per field / visit (maximum Rs. 50/- per field per year)
for sending crop condition photo from the ground level shall be given to identified
individuals like Farmers, Krishi Sakhis, Bima Mitras, ground level staff of Agriculture,
Economics & Statistics & Revenue departments of the States/UTs and any other
channel notified by the GoI. This initiative shall be dovetailed with other initiatives of
the GoI.
20.2.2.6 A detailed SOP/Manual and modalities of the CROPIC platform shall be notified by
the GoI separately.
20.3 Concerns in Yield Data Quality and Timelines for Data Reporting
20.3.1 It has been observed that the normal CCE process being followed for estimating
yield is lacking in reliability, accuracy and speed, which affects claim settlement.
There is a need for real time, good quality and reliable actual yield-data for which
mandatory use of smart phones / handheld devices has to be done for capturing
images, location of the CCE and for online transmission of data on NCIP through
CCEs Agri-app. RST using satellite and drones, weather data, model etc. may also
be used for the purpose of increasing accuracy and speed of yield estimation
through CCEs.
20.3.2 If the CCE derived yield data is not provided by the State/UTs within the stipulated
timeline then technology derived Synthetic Yield data (i.e. crop yield
estimated/simulated using the Models described in the YES-TECH Manual 2023)
will be used for claims settlements. Such Synthetic Yield data of a crop will be
compared with corresponding yield data (derived from CCE based data) for yield
loss assessment. Synthetic yield data is meant for the purpose of timely settlement
of claims when CCE-derived yield data availability is either delayed or disputed.
Synthetic yield or technology derived yield is generated by the agencies designated
by the GoI. The GoI will convene the meeting of the Central TAC constituted for this
purpose with the concerned State/UT Government and the Insurance Companies to
finalize the technology-based claim calculation for that crop. If the Central TAC
recommends, the GoI will send a request letter to MNCFC (Mahalanobis National
Crop Forecast Centre)/ Other Designated Agency (e.g. MITR, SAC, NRSC, IASRI,
IMD, etc.) for the calculation of synthetic yield (model-based yield) for that crop. After
the meeting of Expert Committee and the MNCFC/ Other Designated Agency will
share the synthetic yield within one month from the final receipt of required input
data from the State/UT and/or Insurance Companies and the claims will be settled
based on synthetic yield provided by MNCFC or any Other Designated Agency.
20.4 Fund for Innovation and Technology (FIAT)
20.4.1 Fund for Innovation and Technology (FIAT) has been created by the GoI wherein
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
86

--- Page 87 ---
resources shall be allocated for meeting designated percentage of GoI share/100%
grant in various technological interventions undertaken by the GoI/State
Governments/UT Administrations as admissible. The existing technology fund has
been restructured as FIAT and available fund have also been transferred.
20.4.2 The FIAT shall be funded from the amount already collected from the corpus
generated from excess farmers share of premium surrendered by Insurance
Companies due to application of Area Correction Factor (ACF) along with
corresponding interest accrued on such funds and penalties imposed on Insurance
Companies on account of unsatisfactory performance. The minor insurance claims
of the value as decided by the State/UT against any individual farmer shall also be
moved to this fund instead of being credited to farmer’s account.
20.4.3 The FIAT shall be utilized for the following activities under the scheme:
i. Yield Estimation System Based on Technology (YES-TECH),
ii. Weather Information Network & Data System (WINDS)
iii. Collection of Real-time Photos and Observations of Crops (CROPIC),
iv. To finance and subsidize research & development and improvement in technology
solutions (like Drones, IoT, Remote Sensing etc.),
v. To finance innovation and development of new insurance and risk protection
solutions under the product Sandbox approach, including but not limited to SARTHI
(Sandbox for Agricultural & Rural Security, Technology & Insurance)
vi. For giving grants to Academic, Research and Development institutions for carrying
out research, design and development initiatives, risk protection products and
technology solutions for crop damage and yield loss estimation, crop identification
& digitization etc.
20.4.4 The SOP for management of FIAT and release of funds for aforesaid activities shall
be issued by the GoI, separately.
20.5 Support to the States and Insurance Companies for Technology Adoption:
PMFBY relies more on technology-based solutions for enhancing efficiency and
objectivity in its implementation. For finalizing the best possible methodologies
corresponding to the provisions of OGs, State/UTs and Insurance Companies need
the support of Technology Institutions. This involves a lot of preparatory work by the
State/UTs and Insurers for implementing the scheme. In this connection, State/UTs
are advised to take the support of MNCFC, SRSCs, National Institutes like MITR,
SAC (ISRO), NRSC (ISRO), IMD and ICAR to undertake research and development
of innovative technologies in agricultural applications. Crop maps and satellite
indices that are being generated at MNCFC under various projects like FASAL,
National Agriculture Drought Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS),
Coordinated Horticulture Assessment and Management using Geo-iNformatics
(CHAMAN) etc. can be made available to State/UTs by MNCFC for the purpose of
developing the technology interventions. This would avoid duplication of efforts by
the State/UTs and the insurers.
20.6 Training and Capacity Building: PMFBY relies largely on technology-based
products and services for efficiency, transparency and objectivity in its
implementation. All the stakeholders should therefore create necessary
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
87

--- Page 88 ---
infrastructure, data collection systems and manpower for technology adoption. In
this connection, State/UTs and Insurance Companies have to be given regular
training for better understanding of the new guidelines and developing the methods
for implementation. Therefore, Training and Capacity building programs shall be
curated and developed by the GoI with the support of MNCFC, SAC, NRSC, and
ICAR institutes.
21 Assessment of Claims & Claim Settlement
21.1 Payment of Claim under standard PMFBY is the responsibility of concerned
Insurance Companies. The Insurance Companies shall therefore take all the
necessary steps to take appropriate reinsurance cover for their portfolio in order to
safeguard insured's interest. In case of total premium to total claims ratio exceeds
1:3.5 or percentage of claims to Sum Insured exceeds 35%, whichever is higher, at
the National Level in a specific crop season, then Government will provide protection
to Insurance Companies. The losses exceeding the abovementioned level in the
crop season would be met from equal contribution by the GoI and the concerned
State Governments/UT Administrations. The claim settlement under the scheme
shall be mandatorily assessed and processed as per the applicable relevant
provisions of these guidelines. No other provisions and practices or processes or
other schemes etc. shall be considered for claim assessment and settlement under
PMFBY. The claim settlement protocol under basic cover and all other add-on
covers are explained in details as below:
21.2 Yield Loss due to Wide-spread Calamities under Basic Cover
21.2.1 If the Actual Yield per hectare of the insured crop for the Insurance Unit (calculated
on basis of requisite number of CCEs or a combination of CCE & technology derived
yield estimates, as the case may be) in insured season, falls short of the specified
Threshold Yield for the season, all insured farmers growing that crop in that IU are
deemed to have suffered a shortfall of similar magnitude in yield. PMFBY seeks to
provide coverage against such contingency.
'Claim' shall be calculated at IU level as per the following formula:
(Threshold Yield - Actual Yield)
× Sum Insured
Threshold Yield
Where, Threshold Yield (TY) for a crop in a notified insurance unit is the average
yield of the best 5 years from the past seven years multiplied by applicable Indemnity
Level for that crop as notified by concerned State for the season.
Illustration
In table below, assumed yield of wheat for the last 7 years is given for insurance unit
area of "X". Calculation of TY for Rabi 2015-16 season is given in Table 7 below:
Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Yield
4,500 3,750 2,000 4,250 1,800 4,300 1,750
(kg / ha)
The years of 2012-13 and 2014-15 have the lowest yields.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
88

--- Page 89 ---
Total yield of seven years is 22,350 kg/ha and that of two lowest yield years is 3550
kg/ha i.e. (1,800+1,750). Therefore, according to the provision, the average of the
best five years excluding the two lowest yield years will be (22,350 – 3,550
=18,800/5) i.e., 3,760 kg/ha. Hence, threshold yield at 90%, 80% and 70% of
indemnity levels will be 3,384 kg/ha, 3,008 kg/ha and 2,632 kg/ha respectively.
21.2.2 District Level Joint Committee (DLJC) will be constituted which will look after the
invoking of On-Account Payment under mid-season adversity, prevented sowing,
localized calamities and post-harvest losses.
21.3 Prevented/Failed Sowing and Prevented Planting/Germination Claims
21.3.1 Insurance cover will be provided to farmers in case of widespread incidence of
eligible risks (Para 5.2.1) affecting crops in more than 75% of the area sown in a
notified unit at early stage of sowing which is up to 30 days from the start of sowing
(as per the crop calendar notified by the States/UTs) but no later than 15 days
from cut-off date for enrolment (as notified by the State/UT Government)., leading
to the total loss of crop or in a condition where farmers are not in a position to either
sow or transplant the same crop again.
21.3.2 Eligibility Criteria
21.3.2.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notified by the State/UT.
21.3.2.2 Notified IUs will be eligible for "Prevented Sowing/ Planting" pay-out only if more
than 75% of Crop-wise, normal sown area for notified crop in the IU experienced
unsown/prevented sowing/germination failure during the sowing period (as per the
crop calendar notified by the State/UTs) due to occurrence of widespread
incidence of eligible risks. Normal sown area of the crops will be the average of
actual sown area of the preceding three seasons.
21.3.2.3 Only those farmers are eligible for financial support under this cover who have paid
the premium i.e. the premium amount has been debited from their account before
the peril occurrence notification was issued by the State/UT Government for invoking
this provision for compensation. Banks must ensure that the farmers’ premium is
debited within 15 days from the sanction or renewal of KCC loan of all eligible loanee
farmers and before the cut-off date for debiting the premium.
21.3.2.4 The provision could be invoked for a specific crop or a group of crops in notified IU,
by the Nodal Department of the State Governments/UT Administrations on the basis
of the recommendation submitted by DLMC supported by evidence/weather reports,
other proxy weather indicators and the joint loss assessment survey subject to the
fulfilment of the conditions specified in these guidelines.
21.3.2.5 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of the joint
loss assessment surveys carried out by the representatives of Insurance Company,
District Administration/State Government’s/UT Administration’s Nodal Department
and Farmers. In case of a dispute/disagreement between the stakeholders regarding
the quantum/extent of loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the
crop loss assessment/estimation for the eligibility of the claims will be done using
technology derived solutions such as weather/remote-sensing indices along with
loss assessment surveys of Joint Committee with the weightage of 70% and 30%
respectively for the final assessment and evaluation of the extent of loss.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
89

--- Page 90 ---
Acceptance of the technology driven extent of loss will be binding on all
stakeholders.
21.3.2.6 STAC in coordination with State Remote Sensing Application Center or TIP
appointed under YES-TECH (for the crops notified under Crop Model Matrix (CMM))
will conduct estimation and assessment of the loss as mentioned in Para 21.3.2.5
based on the protocol developed by MNCFC. STAC may take the help of MNCFC if
they desire.
21.3.2.7 The amount payable would be 25% of the gross total Sum Insured and the insurance
coverage shall get terminated. Farmers can have the alternative to sow shorter
duration, resistant crops and avail crop insurance on such crops within the enrolment
period for the same. Enrollment for such alternative crops shall be allowed up
to 15 days from the enrolment cut-off date mentioned in the notification,
subject to the condition that such notification is issued by the State/UT
Government within 15 days after the cut-off date for enrollment and debit of
premium and the alternative crops also having already been notified by the
State /UT Government.
21.3.3 Proxy-Indicators: Indicators to be used for loss intimation could be rainfall data,
other weather indices from WINDS and/or IMD, satellite imagery, Remote sensing
indices, drought assessment reports of the MNCFC and crop condition reports by
district level/ State Government /UT Administration officials, supported by media
reports and field photographs. The State/UT's notification should include all the
necessary details and the broad list of indicators to be used in this regard.
21.3.4 Loss Assessment Procedure
21.3.4.1 The States/UTs would notify the Crop Calendar indicating crop-wise and agro-
climatic zone or district wise cut-off dates by which, this provision could be invoked.
However, these dates should not be later than 30 days from the time of onset of
sowing period and no later than 15 days from the cut-off date for enrolment of farmer.
Beyond this date, this provision shall not be applicable under any circumstance.
21.3.4.2 The DLMC will recommend invoking of prevented sowing to the State Nodal
Department. State/UT Government Notification will only be issued by the concerned
State Nodal Department after consideration and validation using the available proxy
data. Insurance Companies may also provide input to the State/UT in this regard
with substantial evidence for consideration within the stipulated time so that claim of
Insurance Companies may be verified by them. If Insurance Companies makes such
a case, then the DLMC/State Government/UT Administration is bound to get it
examined within a stipulated time of 7 days and in case State Governments/UT
Administrations finds that Prevented Sowing is not applicable then they should
inform the Insurance Companies accordingly along with providing cogent reasons
and justifications for the same.
21.3.4.3 If it is felt that the prevailing conditions precedent triggers for invocation of prevented
sowing have been breached, the Chairman, DLMC on his/her own accord or on the
directions of the State Nodal Department, may convene a meeting of the DLMC
wherein the weather/proxy indicator data as indicated in Table 8, Para 21.3.5.11
shall be presented and discussed. If the Committee finds a breach of the conditions,
then DLMC will issue directions for conducting the joint survey of the crop-wise
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
90

--- Page 91 ---
affected insurance units which includes a written notice to concerned Insurance
Companies for a Joint Survey. The report of the joint survey will be presented in the
DLMC and with the recommendation of DLMC it shall be forwarded to the State
Government/UT Administration for validation and issuance of the necessary
notification for invocation of prevented sowing.
21.3.4.4 State Governments/UT Administrations would declare the list of notified IU that
suffered Prevented or Failed Sowing/Planting/Germination conditions with
approximate areas in percentage of the unit. Such information should be
compulsorily uploaded on NCIP to arrive at the Claim amount of eligible insured
farmers from the Portal itself.
21.3.4.5 Peril occurrence notification issued by the State Governments/UT Administrations
shall be digitized and integrated with the NCIP to ensure complete visibility of
process involved and enabling monitoring of turnaround time taken in loss surveying,
claim calculations and settlement process.
21.3.4.6 For estimation of crop loss in the affected areas, the digital mobile App provided by
the GoI shall be compulsorily used by the Insurance Companies, States/UTs and
loss surveyors appointed by the concerned Insurance Companies. The roll-out of
the mobile app for crop loss assessment surveys shall be notified by the GoI.
21.3.4.7 The State/UTs implementing YES-TECH for the notified crops, may shall ask the
TIPs to submit the Special Report for Prevented Sowing (SR-PS) as mentioned the
YES-TECH Manual 2023.
21.3.5 Conditions
21.3.5.1 The cover will be available for major crops covering a total sown area higher than
25% of the total sown area of the District/Taluka or the equivalent unit for the season
(refer Para 7.2.1.1). Provision of Area Correction Factor (ACF) will not be applicable.
21.3.5.2 Mere disbursement/sanction of loan without receipt/ debit of premium before the
notification of calamity won't make a farmer eligible for claim.
21.3.5.3 This provision has to be notified by the State/UT Government within 30 days from
date of the onset of sowing and no later than 15 days of the cut-off date for enrolment
and debit of premium as notified by the State/UT, beyond which the clause cannot
be invoked. Insurance Companies will not have any right to press for notification of
Preventive Sowing in case the same is not notified by the State/UT Government
within above defined timelines and also shall not withhold any future claims for the
concerned crops & IUs. Any notification beyond the above referred timelines shall
require approval of the GoI before the same is notified by the State/UT.
21.3.5.4 The Insurance Companies shall disburse the claim within 30 days of the State/UTs
Notification invoking the event of the insured risk.
21.3.5.5 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Companies only
after the receipt of at least advance Government share of premium subsidy (1st
tranche of both State/UT Government and the GoI).
21.3.5.6 Insurance Cover would terminate for the affected crop in a Notified IU once a claim
under this section is invoked and the affected Insurance Unit/ Crop would not be
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
91

--- Page 92 ---
eligible for any other add-on and area yield based claim calculated at the end of the
season for that crop & Insurance Unit.
21.3.5.7 Once this provision is invoked, no fresh enrolment of farmers for the affected notified
crops and areas would be done.
21.3.5.8 Once exigency is invoked it applies to all the insured farmers in the Notified
Insurance Unit for a given crop, including those whose crop survived.
21.3.5.9 The Bank would remit farmers’ premium to Insurance Companies, with eligible
loanee farmers list, within 7 days of the intimation of loss under this section, if not
uploaded earlier on Portal. However, this option must be exercised as a last
recourse with proper justification.
Illustration
21.3.5.10 District ‘B’ with 100 Insurance Units has been affected by a dry-spell at the beginning
of crop season, consequently about 80% of the area could not be sown in about 50
Insurance Units for groundnut crop, where per hectare sum insured is Rs. 20,000.
As per the provision of payment for prevented sowing, the benefit payable is Sum
Insured x 25%, which on a sum insured of Rs.20,000 works out to Rs.5,000/- in the
50 Insurance Units with more than 75% area which could not be sown.
21.3.5.11 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Prevented / Failed Sowing and
Prevented Planting / Germination Claims is mentioned in Table 8 below:
Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
action
Formation of DLJC under the It should be a part of
Chairpersonship of the District main Notification to be
Collector (DC)/ District issued the by
Magistrate (DM*) with the State/UT for
following members for loss implementation of
assessment survey: PMFBY. The
 District Agriculture / Horticulture composition of
/ Revenue Officer – as Committee should be
Convener. State/ UT Nodal notified in the PMFBY
 Concerned Insurance Company Department/ (SLCCCI). notification by the
 Representative of the IMD from State/UT & first
nearest Observatory. meeting should be
 Representative of Krishi Vigyan held within a week
1
Kendra (KVK) / Agriculture after the notification to
University. familiarize the
 3 representatives from district members with the
farmers nominated by procedure to be
Agriculture Department. followed.
Details of AWS/ARGs under
WINDS (at appropriate level
To be included in the
according to availability) to be
main notification of
notified by the State/UT for the State/ UT Nodal
State
implementation of Department/ (SLCCCI)
Governments/UT
PMFBY/RWBCIS for weather
Administrations itself.
data supply including rainfall to
DLJC.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
92

--- Page 93 ---
Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
action
Major crops should be declared
strictly based on the criteria
defined in the OG and they
- do -
should be mentioned in the
notification issued by State
Government/UT Administration.
District-wise tentative time period
and cut off dates for sowing of
major crops.
*Cut-off date for applicability of
prevented sowing provision do -
shall not be one month from the State/ UT Nodal
time of onset of sowing period Department/ (SLCCCI)
and no later than 15 days from
the enrolment cut-off date.
Details of the month-wise district-
wise as per IMD's Long Period - do -
Average (LPA) of rainfall.
Decision to be taken about Definitions &
fulfilment of the eligibility of interpretations
more than 75% affected sown regarding proxy
area in the notified insurance indicators would be
unit within one month of the applied as per IMD's
sowing period based on the Guidelines as below.
occurrence of any one of the
%age w.r.t. LPA
proxy Indicators occurring along
Abnormal Weather
with other proxy indicators:-
Parameter: (±) 20 or
• Severe Drought Condition, as more deviation than
defined in the Drought Manual, the LPA.
2016.
Definitions &
• Dry spells and drought declared
interpretations
by State/ UT.
regarding proxy
• Abnormally Low / High indicators for drought
temperature in comparison to would be applied as
2 LPA >20% deviation DLJC per Drought Manual
• Abnormally Low / High rainfall in 2016, i.e.
comparison to LPA > 20%
1. Rainfall Index: Dry
deviation.
Spell: 3-4 weeks with
• Widespread incidences of
<50% of Normal RF
Insect, Pest & Diseases
Rainfall Deviation: < -
impacting > 75% crop sown
20% of Normal
Area*.
Rainfall (RF).
• Any other defined natural event
2. Remote Sensing:
including flooding which may
NDVI/ NDWI
lead to widespread losses
deviation: < -20%-
impacting > 75% crop sown
30% VCI Value--0-
area*.
40%.
Supported by Satellite Image and 3. Crop Sowing: Area
Satellite Index based outputs to Under Sowing: Kharif
be provided by MITR, < 33.3%, Rabi < 50%
ISRO/SAC, MNCFC or MITR’s of crop-wise normal
under YES-TECH, Govt. crop Sown Area*.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
93

--- Page 94 ---
Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
action
condition reports, and Media 4. Soil Moisture:
reports etc. Plant available Soil
Moisture (PASM) /
Moisture Adequacy
Index (MAI) - 0%-
75%.
5. Hydrology:
Reservoir Storage
Index (RSI)-->20%
Ground Water
Drought Index (GWDI)
-->0.16%
Steam Flow Drought
Index (SFDI) -->0.01.
District Agriculture /
Horticulture / Revenue Meeting of the DLMC
Officer (i.e. convener of to be convened with
Keeping watch over the breaching
DLJC) Besides, if relevant data, to be
of set triggers of proxy indicators
Insurance Companies placed before the
as mentioned above.
notice the occurrence of Committee and
3 Meeting of the DLMC to be
prevented sowing / failure decision preferably be
convened on breaching of any
of sowing / planting / taken at-least 15 days
one of proxy indicators as
germination, then they can before the date of
mentioned above.
also report and appeal to invoking this seasonal
DLMC for invoking the event.
clause under the provision.
Sample survey for the assessment
of more than 75% affected sown
area in the notified insurance
unit area and submission of
recommendation along with Within 7 days of
4 To be done by DLMC.
supporting weather/ remote meeting of DLMC.
sensing indices, loss survey
reports, other data and
documentary proofs to State/
UT Nodal Department.
Issue of the notification to invoke Within 7 days from
the provision of prevented State/ UT Nodal receipt of loss
5
sowing & failure of sowing / Department. assessment survey
planting / germination. report of DLMC.
Within 15 days from
Supply of the details of farmers &
the cut-off date for
area insured along with total
enrolment of farmers.
premium (farmers’ share & Banks (loanee & non-
This should be
6 Government subsidy) debited to loanee) and Intermediaries
processed on a
the Insurance Company. This is (non-loanee).
parallel basis with the
prerequisite for making
survey and issuance
payment.
of notification.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
94

--- Page 95 ---
Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
action
Written notice within 7
days to Chairperson-
DLMC with
proofs/data/reports
substantiating the
claim.
DLMC to review the
reports/evidences and
Dispute/Disagreement of any resolve the dispute
stakeholder on the process of within 7 days. In case
7 By any stakeholder.
Loss Assessment Survey or the dispute is still
Extent of assessed loss. unresolved, the
affected stakeholder
can make appeal to
State Nodal
Department,
thereafter to STAC, as
per process defined in
Grievance Redressal
mechanism.
Assessment of likely claim based
Within one month of
8 on notification issued by State
the notification
Nodal Department.
invoking this provision
Payment to eligible farmers (25%
subject to receipt of
of sum insured), and insurance
Insurance Company 1st tranche of
coverage for the crop-IU gets
advance Government
9 over. No other claim after
Subsidy
payment under this provision
(both State/UT and
will be applicable even to those
the GoI).
farmers whose crop survived.
Data pertaining to Loss
assessment report finalized by
Within 7 days of the
10 DLJC and admissible claims will Insurance Company
Survey.
be uploaded on the NCIP
against each eligible farmer.
*Note: Normal Sown Area will be Average of crop-wise Actual Sown Area of immediately preceding
three seasons and will be made available by the concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations on NCIP.
21.4 On-Account Payment of Claims due to Mid-Season Adversity
21.4.1 Insurance cover will be provided to the farmers to provide immediate relief in case
of adverse seasonal conditions during the crop season viz. floods, prolonged dry
spells, severe drought etc., between the period from 30 days from start of
onset of sowing and up to 15 days before the onset of harvest time, (as per
the crop calendar notified by the States/UT Governments) wherein the
expected yield during the season is likely to be less than 50% of Normal Yield.
21.4.2 Eligibility Criteria
21.4.2.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notified by the State/UT
Government.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
95

--- Page 96 ---
21.4.2.2 All notified IUs would be eligible for "On-Account" payment only if the expected Yield
of the affected crop during the season in those IUs is less than 50% of Normal Yield
where normal yield will be determined as an average of immediately preceding 7
years yield data.
21.4.2.3 The provision could be invoked for a specific crop or a group of crops in the notified
IU, by the DLMC/State Governments/UT Administrations on the basis of proxy
weather indicators supported by the joint loss assessment survey subject to
fulfilment of the conditions specified in the OGs.
21.4.2.4 The quantum of likely losses and the amount of 'On-Account' payment shall be
decided based on the joint survey by representatives of IC, District
Administration/State Government’s/UT Administration’s Nodal Department and
Farmers. In case of dispute/disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the
quantum/extent of loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the claim
calculation will be done using technology derived solutions involving weather and/or
remote-sensing indices along with loss assessment surveys with weightage of 70%
and 30% respectively for assessment and evaluation of the final extent of loss.
Acceptance of the technology-based assessment of the extent of loss shall be
binding on all stakeholders.
21.4.2.5 STAC in coordination with respective State Remote Sensing Application Center
(SRSAC) or TIP appointed under YES-TECH (for the crops notified under Crop
Model Matrix (CMM)) will conduct the crop yield estimation and assessment of
potential loss as mentioned in Para 21.4.2.4 based on the protocol developed by
MNCFC. STAC may take help of MNCFC if they desire.
21.4.2.6 Only those farmers would be eligible for financial support under this cover who have
paid the premium / the premium has been debited from their account before the
happening of the mid-season adversity. Banks must ensure to debit farmers
premium within 15 days from sanction or renewal of KCC/crop loan of all eligible
farmers and well before the cut-off date for debiting the premium to provide benefit of
this add on cover.
21.4.2.7 Amount payable would be 25% of the likely claims subject to adjustment against
final yield claims based on yield assessment data arrived through CCEs.
21.4.2.8 If adversity occurs within a period of 30 days from the start of onset of sowing
(as per the crop calendar/notified by the State/UTs) and within 15 days before
the onset of harvesting, this provision will not be invoked. For the former case,
the losses will be compensated under Prevented Sowing/Failed Germination clause
and for the later case, the losses will be paid on the basis of CCE based yield
estimation data. State Governments/UT Administrations shall compulsorily notify the
district-crop wise onset of sowing and harvesting for notified crops including multi-
picking crops.
21.4.2.9 Maximum liability is limited to the maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
crop's area within insured land parcel and the pay-out under this provision would be
in proportion to the loss incurred on the crop in the insured land parcel, up to the
occurrence of the insured peril.
21.4.2.10 Payout under this peril will be as per the payment modalities given in the Annexure-
V of these Guidelines.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
96

--- Page 97 ---
21.4.2.11 In case the crop losses are triggered due to multiple events under different or similar
covers, the payout under localized calamites shall be calculated as per the
modalities described in Para 21.7, “Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of
Similar or Different Perils”, of the Operational Guidelines.
21.4.3 Proxy-Indicators: Indicators to be used for loss intimation could be rainfall data,
other weather indices from WINDS and/or IMD, satellite imagery, remote sensing
indices, drought assessment reports of MNCFC and crop condition reports by the
district level/ State Government /UT Administration officials, supported by media
reports and field photographs. The State's notification should also spell out all the
necessary details and the broad list of indicators to be used in this regard. A detailed
SOP/Manual and modalities for setting up crop-specific weather-parameter triggers
as a first level of qualifying mechanism for conducting physical loss assessment
surveys shall be notified by the GoI separately.
21.4.4 Loss Assessment Procedure
21.4.4.1 The Joint Committee of the State/UT or District Administration/Nodal Department
and the Insurer (refer Para 21.3.5.11) for the assessment of crop damage have to
be formed and notified before the start of the crop season by the SLCCCI for each
district.
21.4.4.2 When it is perceived that a risk is triggered as defined in the protocol for different
indices, viz. Weather, Remote Sensing, Hydrology, Soil Moisture & Insects/ Pest/
Disease impact resulting into mid-term adverse impact on crops and thereby
qualifying for on-account payment of claims and if it is felt that the prevailing
conditions precedent for invocation of mid-season adversity have been breached,
the Chairperson, DLMC on his/her own accord or on the directions of State Nodal
Department, as the case may be, convene the meeting of DLMC wherein the
weather/proxy indicator data of the indicators as indicated in Table 9 shall be
presented and discussed. If the Committee feels that the triggers for invocation of
mid-season adversity as mentioned above have been breached, then DLMC will
issue directions for convening a meeting of the DLJC for conducting a joint survey
of the crop-wise affected insurance unit and written notice may be issued to
concerned Insurance Company for the Joint Survey. The report of the joint survey
will be presented in the DLMC/DLJC and with the recommendation of DLMC it shall
be forwarded to State Governments/UT Administrations for validation and issue of
necessary notification for invocation of mid-season adversity.
21.4.4.3 The Joint Committee shall decide the eligibility for mid-term adversity declaration based
on the daily weather indices from WINDS and/or IMD (available AWS/ARGs under
WINDS notified by the Government/long term average rainfall data/temperature data),
satellite imagery and remote sensing indices, Crop condition, insect/pest/disease
impact etc., indicating crop yield losses at notified IU level.
21.4.4.4 Based on these parameters, the Joint Committee will assess whether the provision
of On-account payment will be invoked and will call for a joint survey. A formal letter
has to be issued within 7 days from the adverse seasonal event by the concerned
District Administration and District Level Joint Committee for carrying out the joint
loss assessment surveys in affected IUs along with a list of such IUs.
21.4.4.5 Based on the above report, a joint inspection of the affected area shall be done the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
97

--- Page 98 ---
Insurance Company along with the District Administration/Nodal Department
officials and farmer representatives for ground truth/sample survey using mobile
phone App and arrive at the extent of loss by carrying out IU level sample loss
surveys.
21.4.4.6 Information/Services of MITR, MNCFC, ISRO or State/UT specific SRSACs may
also be utilized for determination of the extent of loss, using satellite data, for On-
Account pay-out.
21.4.4.7 If the assessed loss of the affected crop assessed through Loss Assessment
Surveys is more than 50% of the normal crop yield for the Notified Insurance Unit, On-
Account payment would be payable within 30 days from the date of the invocation
of mid-term adversity. It is important that the yield / crop losses estimated for mid-
season adversity should be reasonably accurate and should have parity with end of
season final crop yield estimates.
21.4.4.8 The sample surveys for estimation of crop yield loss in the affected IUs shall be
conducted using the digital mobile App provided by the GoI, by the States/UT
officials and the loss surveyors appointed by the concerned Insurance Companies.
21.4.4.9 On-Account payment would be calculated as per following formula:
(Threshold Yield - Estimated Yield)
× Sum Insured × 25%
Threshold Yield
21.4.5 Timeframe for Loss Assessment and Submission of Report
21.4.5.1 A formal invocation of mid-season adversity through a formal letter will be issued by
the District Administration/Nodal Department of State/UT Government asking to
carry out the loss assessment surveys with details of the affected IUs within 7 days
from the occurrence of adverse seasonal event.
21.4.5.2 Loss assessment report at the affected insurance unit level has to be completed by
the Joint Committee within 15 days from occurrence of the adverse seasonal event
and the loss report should compulsorily be uploaded on NCIP to arrive at the Claim
amount of eligible insured farmers from the Portal.
21.4.5.3 The State/UTs implementing YES-TECH for the notified crops, may ask the TIPs to
submit the Special Report for Mid-Season Adversity (SR-MSA) as mentioned the
YES-TECH Manual 2023.
21.4.5.4 Peril occurrence notification issued by the State Governments/UT Administrations
shall also be digitized and integrated with the NCIP to ensure complete visibility of
process involved and enabling monitoring of turnaround time taken in loss survey,
claim calculations and settlement process.
21.4.6 Conditions
21.4.6.1 Mere disbursement/ sanction of loan without receipt/ debit of premium before the
notification of the calamity would not make a farmer eligible for the claim.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
98

--- Page 99 ---
21.4.6.2 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Company only
after the receipt of at least advance Government share of premium subsidy (1st
tranche of both State/UT and the GoI).
21.4.6.3 On-Account payment would be paid to all eligible insured farmers within one month
of the notification invoking this provision by the State/UT Government and subject
to receipt of loss assessment report from State/UT Government.
21.4.6.4 These claims would be adjusted against the end season area approach yield based
claims.
21.4.6.5 Banks would remit farmers' premium to the Insurance Companies, with the farmers
list, within 7 days of the intimation of loss under this section, if not uploaded earlier
on Portal. However, this option must be exercised as a last recourse with proper
justification.
Illustration
District 'A' has been affected by floods having 100 insurance units under Crop 'X'.
Out of which 50 insurance units were severely affected and as per the weather
indicators / agro-met data, it has been assessed that 30 IUs could have yield loss of
more than 50% of the normal yield. Out of these 30 insurance units, estimated yield
loss against TY for 5 units is 80% (Category-I), for another 10 units, it is 70%
(Category-II) and remaining 15 units, it is 60% (Category-III) of normal yield. As per
declarations received, if sum insured for notified areas in Category-I, Category-II and
Category-III is Rs. 1 crore, Rs. 2 crore, and Rs. 3 crore, respectively, then likely total
claims will be Rs. 80 lakh, 140 lakh and 180 lakh, respectively. Hence on-account
claims upto 25% shall be Rs.20 lakh, 35 lakh and 45 lakh, which will be released
during the season subject to receipt of premium subsidy.
21.4.6.6 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for On Account Payment of Claims due to Mid-
Season Adversity is mentioned in Table 9 below:
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
Formation of DLJC under the
Chairpersonship of DC/DM with the
following members for loss It should be a part of main
assessment survey: Notification to be issued
• by State/ UT for
istrict Agriculture / Horticulture/ implementation of
Revenue Officer - as Convener. PMFBY. The
• composition of
oncerned Insurance Company. State/ UT Nodal Committee should be
1 • Department/ notified in the PMFBY
epresentative of IMD from nearest (SLCCCI) notification by the
Observatory, if available. State/UT & first meeting
• should be held within a
epresentative of KVK / Agriculture week after notification to
University. familiarize the members
• with the procedure to be
representatives from district farmers followed.
nominated by Agriculture
Department.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
99

--- Page 100 ---
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
•
istrict collector may co-opt experts.
Details of AWS/ARG under WINDS
to be notified by the State/ UT for
implementation of PMFBY for
weather data supply including To be included in the
rainfall to DLJC. State/ UT Nodal main notification of State
Department/ Governments/UT
Tentative dates of crop-wise &
(SLCCCI) Administrations itself.
district-wise sowing & harvesting.
Details of month-wise district-wise
IMD's Long Period Average LPA of
rainfall.
After 1 month from onset of sowing
Definitions &
and before 15 days from the onset of
interpretations regarding
harvest time, fulfilment of eligibility of
proxy indicators would be
On-Account payment (i.e. 50% yield
applied as per IMD's
loss in standing crops to be
guidelines as below.
compared with Normal yield in
%age w.r.t. LPA
notified insurance unit area as
Abnormal Weather
explained in Para 21.4.2.2) is to be
Parameter: (±) 20 or
decided based on occurrence of any
more deviation than the
one of the proxy Indicators occurring
LPA.
along with other proxy indicators of:
Definitions &
• Severe Drought Condition, as
interpretations regarding
defined in the Drought Manual,
proxy indicators for
2016.
drought would be applied
• Dry spells and drought declared by
as per Drought Manual
State/ UT.
2 DLJC 2016, i.e.
• Abnormally Low / High temperature
in comparison to LPA>20% 1. Rainfall Index: Dry
deviation. Spell: 3-4 weeks with
• Abnormally Low / High rainfall in <50% of Normal RF
comparison to LPA > 20% deviation.
Rainfall Deviation: < -
• Widespread incidences of Insect,
20% of Normal Rainfall
Pest & Diseases impacting > 25%
(RF).
insured crop Area*.
• Any other defined natural event 2. Remote Sensing:
NDVI/ NDWI deviation: <
including flooding which may lead to
-20%-30% VCI Value--0-
widespread losses impacting > 25%
40%.
insured crop area*.
3. Crop Sowing: Area
Supported by Satellite Image and
Under Sowing: Kharif <
Satellite Index based outputs to be
33.3%, Rabi < 50% of
provided by MITR, ISRO/SAC,
crop-wise normal Sown
MNCFC or MITR’s under YES-
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
100

--- Page 101 ---
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
TECH, Government crop condition Area*.
reports, and Media reports etc.
4. Soil Moisture: PASM)/
MAI -- 0%-75%.
5. Hydrology:
RSI --> 20%
GWDI --> 0.16%
SFDI --> 0.01.
Meeting of DLJC to be
convened with relevant
Keeping watch over breaching of set data to be placed before
triggers of proxy indicators as the Committee and
District Agriculture /
mentioned above. Meeting of DLJC decision should be taken
Horticulture /
to be convened on breaching of any within 7 days from the
3 Revenue Officer
one of above triggers of excess occurrence of adverse
(i.e. convener of
rainfall, flooding, deficit rainfall and seasonal event and
DLJC).
dry spells, drought, high/low communicated through a
temperature, Insect/ Pest-Disease. letter for conducting joint
loss assessment surveys
in listed IUs.
Physical loss assessment survey to
Within 7 days of issuing
be carried out at 10 different
To be done by of letter for carrying out
4 randomly selected locations spread
DLJC. loss assessment surveys
across the affected Insurance Units
by DLJC.
(IU).
Written notice within 7
days to Chairman-DLMC
with proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
DLMC to review the
reports/evidences and
Dispute/Disagreement of any resolve the dispute within
stakeholder on the process of Loss 7 Days. In case the
5 By any Stakeholder.
Assessment Survey or Extent of dispute is still
assessed loss. unresolved, the affected
stakeholder can make
appeal to State Nodal
Department, thereafter to
STAC as per process
defined in Grievance
Redressal mechanism.
Within one month from
Assessment of likely losses &
the date of DLJC letter to
6 amount of 'on-account' payment carry out loss
based on the joint survey.
assessment surveys
Insurance Company subject to receipt of at
least 1st instalment of
Payment to eligible farmers (25% of advance Government
7
likely claims). Subsidy (both State/UT
and the GoI).
Data pertaining to Loss assessment
Within 7 days of the
8 report finalized by DLJC and Insurance Company
survey.
admissible claims will be uploaded
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
101

--- Page 102 ---
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
on the NCIP against each eligible
farmer.
*Note: Insured Crop Area will be the Actual Insured Area of notified crop in Notified IU in
the current seasons as available on NCIP.
21.5 Localized Calamity
21.5.1 The Scheme provides for insurance cover at the individual farm level to crop losses
due to occurrence of localized perils/ calamities viz. hailstorm, landslide,
inundation, cloud burst and natural fire due to lightening affecting part of a
notified unit or a specific land parcel.
21.5.2 For the purpose of indemnification of crop losses due to inundation as localized
calamity, Inundation is a situation where insured field is covered or submerged by
water due to the rise in water level by natural rainfall or from an artesian well or flood
water from local water bodies and where water stays for a prolonged period and
causes visible damage to the crop.
21.5.3 However, this is subject to confirmation of the damage in the joint survey to be
conducted by the State/UT Government representative and Insurance Company in
presence of the concerned farmer. The States/UTs shall notify the crops to be
included under localized calamity losses along with the crop calendar in the Bid
Document and Notification (as per Para 7.3) on the NCIP. The crops not falling under
the aforesaid category/not included in the tender shall not be included later for
localized calamity loss cover.
21.5.4 Eligibility Criteria
21.5.4.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notified by the State/UT
Government.
21.5.4.2 Available to all insured farmers, at farm unit level, affected by above mentioned perils
in a Notified IU growing notified crops for which insurance has been availed.
21.5.4.3 Available for all notified crops which have been declared eligible for localized
calamity losses as per the State/UT Government notification and damaged by
specified perils during when the crop is in standing condition up till harvesting.
21.5.4.4 Only those farmers would be eligible for financial support under this cover who have
paid the premium i.e. the premium has been debited from their account before the
occurrence of the insured peril.
21.5.4.5 Maximum liability is limited to the maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
crop's area within insured land parcel and the pay-out under this provision would be
in proportion to the loss incurred on the crop in the insured land parcel, up to the
occurrence of the insured peril.
21.5.4.6 Payout under this peril will be as per the payment modalities given in the Annexure-
V of these Guidelines.
21.5.4.7 In case the crop losses are triggered due to multiple events under different or similar
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
102

--- Page 103 ---
covers, the payout under localized calamites shall be calculated as per the
modalities described in Para 21.7, “Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of
Similar or Different Perils”, of the Operational Guidelines.
21.5.4.8 Proxy-Indicators: Rainfall data from WINDS network/ hailstorm/landslide/
lightening (natural fire) incidences substantiated by reports in the local media or
reports of the Agriculture/ Revenue Department supported by media Report and
other evidence. A detailed SOP/Manual and modalities for setting up crop-specific
weather-parameter triggers as a first level of qualifying mechanism for conducting
physical loss assessment surveys shall be notified by the GoI separately.
21.5.5 Loss Assessment Procedure
21.5.5.1 Time and Method of Reporting the Loss/Claims
A. The State/UT Government shall define the period during which the crop is in
standing position (district crop wise Crop calendar), during which this provision can
be invoked. In the case of any event occurring beyond the defined period, this
provision shall not be applicable under any circumstances.
B. Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer as detailed in Para
21.5.5.4 below.
C. Intimation must contain details of insured farmer's name, affected survey number-
wise insured crop and acreage affected, Farmer's Application No as on NCIP,
his/her Mobile Number etc. KCC A/c No. (In case of loanee farmer) or saving bank
Account (in case of non-Loanee farmer as declared at the time of applying for crop
insurance) for identification and verification purpose.
D. Premium payment verification to be done from the portal and in case of need, may
be verified from the bank. The bank shall provide the payment verification within the
next 48 hours of receipt of such request.
E. Mobile application may be used for reporting incidence of localized calamities for
intimation of events including longitude/latitude details and pictures using Mobile
App developed by DA&FW.
21.5.5.2 Localized Calamity claim amount at individual farm level shall be calculated as per
the following formula:
𝑨𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒐𝒖𝒕 𝒐𝒇 𝑬𝒔𝒕𝒊𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑪𝒓𝒐𝒑 𝑫𝒂𝒎𝒂𝒈𝒆
𝑆𝒖𝒎 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 × (%) × (%)
𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒊𝒏 𝑨𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂
21.5.5.3 For estimation of crop loss in the individual farms/land parcels, the digital mobile
App developed by the GoI shall be compulsorily used by the Insurance Companies,
States/UTs and loss surveyors appointed by the concerned Insurance Companies.
21.5.5.4 Channel of reporting i.e. Whom to be reported: Intimation may be given within 72
hours by the farmer either directly through the "Crop Insurance App" or on
dedicated centralized toll-free number of Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline (14447).
The intimation may also be forwarded through the concerned bank branch, local
agriculture department Government/district officials. The first mode of intimation
should be the "Crop Insurance App" and the centralized Toll-Free Number (KRPH)
for this purpose. This can be followed by intimation through the bank or district
officials to Insurance Company for conducting the individual level loss assessment.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
103

--- Page 104 ---
The concerned bank/intermediary, if asked by the Insurance Companies would
verify the insured details like crop insured, sum insured, premium debited and date
of debit & remittance and share with the Insurance Company for conducting the crop
loss assessment.
21.5.5.5 Reporting of losses will be done through the Crop Insurance App and the Centralized
Toll-Free Number (KRPH), along with other channels. Other Channels will be
phased out subsequently.
21.5.5.6 In case the intimation has been given through the concerned bank branch or State/UT
Government officials, the same shall be forwarded by the Bank Branches or Govt.
officials of the concerned Insurance Company within the next 48 hours through
available channels or Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline.
21.5.6 Documentary Evidence Required for Loss Assessment
21.5.6.1 Duly filled crop loss intimation through the Crop Insurance App or Krishi Rakshak
Portal & Helpline, or other mentioned channels, along with all relevant documents is
necessary for initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims. However, if
information on all the columns is not readily available, partial information may be
sent to the Insurance Company and later within 7 days of the loss, the form with
complete details may be submitted.
21.5.6.2 The Insurance Companies are responsible for ensuring that sufficient number of loss
intimation forms are available at the bank branch & local Government officials level.
Any other additional documents can be collected directly from the farmer at the time
of loss assessment by the representative/surveyor of the Insurance Company.
Insurance Company shall complete all formalities and collect any ancillary
information required for the payment of such claims, like local newspaper cutting
and any other available evidence to substantiate the occurrence of loss event and
severity of the loss, if any.
21.5.6.3 Weather data report from the WINDS network, Mid-season report (MSR) under YES-
TECH), IMD reports, Media reports, Local Newspaper cuttings to substantiate
occurrence of loss event and severity of the loss, if any.
21.5.7 Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company
21.5.7.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the Insurance Company for assessment
of losses due to incidence of Localized Calamities. The loss assessors appointed by
the Insurance Companies should be in accordance with the IRDAI provisions. The
loss assessors appointed should possess following experience and qualification:
 Diploma/degree in any subject with a minimum of 2 years relevant experience or
bachelor’s degree in agriculture and allied subjects with one year experience.
 Retired Government officials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension Department
having Diploma/B.Sc(Ag.) degree.
 Retired Bank officials with experience of Agriculture Value Chain financing or Kisan
Credit Card (KCC).
21.5.7.2 For compliance under the above provisions the Insurance Companies would utilize
the empaneled loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
104

--- Page 105 ---
21.5.7.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team comprising of loss assessor appointed
by the insurer, block level agriculture officer, primary worker of the agriculture or
revenue department and the concerned farmer. Loss assessment surveys shall be
conducted by the Joint Committee, at each individual field level, through the Mobile
App specifically developed for the same by the GoI. The loss assessment data shall
be uploaded on the NCIP on a real time basis to arrive at the Claim amount of the
eligible insured farmers.
21.5.8 Time frame for Loss Assessment and Submission of the Report
A. Appointment of loss assessor within 48 hours.
B. Loss assessment to be completed within the next 10 days.
C. Claim settlement to be completed in next 15 days (subject to receipt of farmers’
premium& first instalment of Subsidy).
Maximum liability would be limited to maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
cropped area within insured land parcel and the pay-out under this provision would
be in proportion to the loss incurred on the crop in the insured land parcel, up to the
occurrence of the insured peril. Intimation of crop losses is compulsory for individual
insured farmers through various channels in case of losses due to specified localized
calamities. If the intimation of crop losses due to specified localized calamities is
received by the State Governments/UT Administrations, then they will enter the data
of intimations of crop losses in a form that can be uploaded in the KRPH and provide
the same to Insurance Company along with copies of the intimations received. The
Insurance Company shall reconcile the total intimations data by comparing with the
number of insured farmers in a notified insurance unit.
If the insured area in an IU with loss intimations as compared to the total insured
area for that particular crop in the IU is less than 25%, then an individual survey of
all the farmers shall have to necessarily be done. This assessment shall have to be
done for each insured crop-land parcel individually in the IU.
Wide-spread Localized Calamity: If the Insured area under loss intimation under
localized calamity claims in an IU is more than 25% of the total Insured area in the
IU during a specific weather event having a single/similar peril, then the event shall
be considered as Wide-spread Localized calamity and the sample loss survey will
be conducted at 10 different randomly selected crop-land parcels using the loss
intimation list across the affected Insurance Unit and average loss %age basis the
sample survey shall be applicable to all intimations for the given IU during the
specific weather event. In this case, the losses will not be considered as individual
and will be presumed widespread. Therefore, the claims shall be disbursed to all
eligible insured farmers (who have given intimation/for whom intimation has been
received/accepted) in accordance with the crop loss assessment arrived at following
the below tabular grid. Accordingly, loss assessment and claim disbursement
shall be done as per below:
(Average Area Affected %age X Average Crop Loss %) 𝑿 Sum Insured X 25%
For the purpose of defining the weather event, loss of or damage to the insured crop
under PMFBY arising from a single weather peril active during any given period shall
be deemed as a single event until there is a break in continuity of occurrence of the
same peril for 72 consecutive hours, i.e. if there is not a break of more than 72 hours
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
105

--- Page 106 ---
between events under a similar peril, such events shall be considered as a single
event for calculation of event period.
D. The tentative sample size would be as under:
Intimation (affected area against Insured area
Survey
notified crop)
Less than 25% All Intimations would be surveyed
Sample survey at IU crop level as per mid-season
>25%
Adversity provisions
21.5.9 Conditions
21.5.9.1 Mere disbursement/sanction of a loan without receipt/debit of premium before the
occurrence of insured peril would not make a farmer eligible for the claim.
21.5.9.2 When the affected area is limited up to 25% of the total insured area for the season,
in the notified insurance unit, the losses of eligible farmers would be assessed
individually provided they have intimated and paid premium prior to occurrence of
insurance peril. The intimation is a pre-condition to get benefit for the localized claim.
Intimations received during the survey would also be considered.
21.5.9.3 If the affected area under a notified crop is more than 25% of the total insured area
in a notified insurance unit, all the eligible farmers who have taken insurance for the
notified crop, which has been damaged, and informed about the occurrence of a
calamity in the individual insured farm/land parcel within the stipulated time in the
notified Insurance Unit (IU), would be deemed to have suffered localized loss and
would be eligible for financial support under localized calamity loss. The percentage
of loss would be arrived at by Insurance Company through a requisite number of
sample survey as defined in the detailed protocol for the add-on cover.
21.5.9.4 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of joint loss
assessment surveys carried out by representatives of Insurance Company, District
Administration/State Government’s/UT Administration’s Nodal Department and
Farmers. Further if the affected area is more than 25% of the total insured area and
there is dispute / disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the
quantum/extent of loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the claim
calculation will be done using technology derived solutions involving weather
and/or remote-sensing indices along with loss assessment surveys with a
weightage of 70% and 30% respectively for assessment and evaluation of the
final extent of loss. Acceptance of the technology-driven extent of loss will be
binding on all stakeholders.
21.5.9.5 STAC in coordination with State Remote Sensing Application Centre or TIP
appointed under YES-TECH (for the crops notified under Crop Model Matrix (CMM))
will conduct yield estimation and assessment of loss as mentioned in Para 21.5.9.4
based on the protocol developed by MNCFC. STAC may take the help of MNCFC if
they desire.
21.5.9.6 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Company only
after the receipt of at least advance Government share of premium subsidy (1st
instalment of both State/UT and the GoI).
21.5.9.7 The Insurance Company would disburse the claim, if payable within 15 days of survey
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
106

--- Page 107 ---
of loss.
21.5.9.8 Farmers getting enrolled or whose premium is debited after the occurrence of
insurance peril or data has not been uploaded on NCIP would not be eligible for
financial support under this cover.
21.5.10 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for payment of Localized claims is mentioned in
Table 10 below:
Schedule for
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
taking action
Intimation may be given within
72 hours by the farmer either
through Crop Insurance App,
Krishi Rakshak Portal &
Helpline, directly to the
Insurance Company through
its dedicated toll-free number
or through the concerned
bank, local agriculture
department Government/
district officials.
However, the first mode of
intimation should be either
crop insurance app or Krishi
Rakshak Portal & Helpline.
In case the intimation has
been given through concerned Affected farmer(s) may
bank branch or Government intimate through KRPH or
officials, the same shall be Mobile App or Chat Bot
forwarded within the next 48 Platform of GoI. Farmer
Within 72 hours`
hours to the Insurance should provide his/her bank
from the
1 Company. account number (loan
occurrence of a
account for loanee farmer
Intimation about occurrence of peril.
and savings account for
localized perils/ calamities viz.
non-loanee farmer) or
Hailstorm, Landslide,
Application number
Inundation, Cloud burst and
generated from the portal at
Natural fire due to lightening
the time of intimation.
may be given up to harvest
date as notified in the State/UT
Notification and supported by
information of WINDS, IMD /
local media, and Reports of
Agriculture / Revenue
Departments, Media Reports.
The individual crop losses due
to occurrence of localized
perils will be treated as
localized calamity if the crop is
standing on the field provided
that the said crop has been
notified for localized calamity
cover. However, if the crop has
been harvested and/or if the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
107

--- Page 108 ---
Schedule for
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
taking action
crop has been cut and is lying
on the field, in such cases the
calamity would fall under the
post-harvest losses provided
the said crop has been notified
for the post-harvest cover and
it would only be considered for
crops which are required to be
kept on the field for drying up
maximum for a period of two
weeks (14 days).
During the Harvest Period
window, intimations for
Localized calamity and post-
harvest losses shall be treated
as separate risks beyond CCE
based loss and losses shall be
assessed accordingly as per
applicable provisions of these
Guidelines.
Forwarding of information / Within 48 hours
Intimation of the farmer(s) to Bank/PACS, Local from the receipt
2 Insurance Company by either Agriculture Department / of the information
KRPH or using other alternate District officials. / intimation from
mechanism. the farmer(s).
Appointment of loss assessor Within 48 hours
as per qualifications & from the receipt
3 Insurance company
experience laid down in the of the information
OGs of PMFBY. / intimation.
Assessment of affected area in
4 DLJC Within 10 days of
term of % of insured area.
the appointment
Individual level assessment of
Jointly by Insurance of the loss
loss (in case the affected area
Company & block level assessor by the
5 is < 25% of the total insured
Agriculture Officer. company.
area).
Verification of the details of the
affected insured farmer(s) Within 7 days of
from the bank using NCIP or the intimation of
6 Insurance company
any other alternate loss.
mechanism.
Within 15 days
from receipt of
loss assessment
report subject to
receipt of at least
Claim-payment to affected advance
7 Insurance company
farmers. Government
share of subsidy
(1st tranche of
both the State/UT
Government and
the GoI).
8 Data of the Loss Assessment Insurance company Within 7 days of
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
108

--- Page 109 ---
Schedule for
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by
taking action
report finalized by DLJC, and the survey.
admissible claims will be
uploaded on the NCIP against
the farmer from whom the loss
intimation was received.
Protocol for Area based Assessment: If affected area >25% of total insured Area:
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
Fulfilment of eligibility of
localized calamities/losses on
area-based loss assessment
(i.e. affected area is >25% of
the total insured crop area) is
to be decided based on the
occurrence of any one of the
proxy Indicators:-
•
ide-spread excess rainfall.
•
ide-spread flooding/
inundation.
Definitions &
•
interpretations of proxy
ide-spread cloud burst /
indicators would be
landslide.
applied as per IMD's
•
guidelines as below:
ide-spread natural fire due to
1 lightning. DLJC
%age w.r.t. LPA.
•
ide-spread hailstorm/ hailing.
Abnormal Weather
•
Parameter: (±) 20 or more
ny other defined natural
deviation than the Long
event including
Period Average.
flooding/inundation which
may lead to widespread
effect and losses impacting >
25% of the insured crop
area*.
Supported by Satellite Image
and Satellite Index based
outputs to be provided by
MITR, ISRO/SAC, MNCFC or
MITR’s under YES-TECH,
Government crop condition
reports, and media reports,
etc.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
109

--- Page 110 ---
Action to be taken Schedule for taking
Sl. No. Action required to be taken
by action
Meeting of the DLJC to be
convened. Relevant data
Keeping watch over the
to be placed before the
breaching of set triggers of
Committee. The decision
proxy indicators as mentioned District Agriculture /
should be taken within 7
above. Meeting of the DLJC to Horticulture /
days from the occurrence
2 be convened on the breaching Revenue Officer
of adverse seasonal
of the any one of the above (i.e. convener
event and communicated
triggers of unseasonal rainfall, of DLJC).
through a letter for
cyclone or cyclonic rainfall,
conducting loss
and hailstorm.
assessment surveys in
the listed IUs.
Within 15 days of the
Physical loss assessment letter received for
To be done by
survey to be carried out (as carrying out the loss
3 DLJC.
mentioned in Para 21.5.8). assessment surveys by
the DLJC.
Written notice within 7
days to be submitted to
the Chairman-DLMC with
proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim.
The DLMC to review the
reports/evidence and
resolve the dispute within
Dispute/Disagreement raised Any Stakeholder. 7 days. In case the
by any stakeholder on the dispute is unresolved, the
process of Loss Assessment affected stakeholder can
4 Survey or Extent of assessed make an appeal to State
loss. Nodal Department,
thereafter to STAC, as
per the process defined in
the Grievance Redressal
mechanism.
Within one month from
Finalization of likely losses & the date of the DLJC
5 Payout. letter to carry out the loss
assessment surveys
subject to receipt of at
Insurance Company least advance
Government share of
Payment to eligible farmers subsidy (1st tranche of
6
both the State/UT
Government and the
GoI).
Data of loss assessment
finalized by DLJC and
admissible claims will be Within 7 days of the
Insurance Company
uploaded on the NCIP against survey.
7
the farmer from whom loss
intimation has been received.
*Note1: Crop damage should have occurred on account of inundation, mere water
logging without corresponding crop loss will not be eligible.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
110

--- Page 111 ---
*Note2: Inundation peril is not applicable in the case of hydrophilic crops like Paddy,
Sugarcane, Jute and Mesta.
*Note3: If affected area is more than 25% of the insured area of notified crop in
notified insurance unit then the losses are not considered as individual and are
presumed to be widespread, therefore claim to all eligible insured farmers would be
paid as per the modalities adopted for On-Account Payment of Claims due to Mid-
Season Adversity claims.
Illustration
• A - Sum Insured for a crop=Rs.30,000
• B - % area affected out of the total area insured = 100%
• C - %crop loss estimated in affected area basis joint physical survey = 80%
• D - Claims payable = A x B x C = Rs. 30,000 x 100% X 80% = Rs. 24,000/-
21.6 Post-Harvest Losses
21.6.1 Provision has been made for assessment of loss on individual plot basis in the case
of occurrence of hailstorm, cyclone, cyclonic rains and unseasonal rains
resulting in damage to harvested crop lying in the field in 'cut and spread' or small
bundled condition depending on nature of the crop in that area kept solely to dry up
to a maximum period of two weeks (14 days) from harvesting.
21.6.2 For indemnification of post-harvest crop losses, the provision of damage of harvested
crops due to unseasonal rains shall trigger when the unseasonal rainfall is more than
20% over long period average for the month for that sub-district/district.
21.6.3 However, this is subject to confirmation of the damage in the joint survey to be
conducted by concerned State/UT Government and Insurance Company. The
States/UTs have to compulsorily notify the crops to be included under post-harvest
losses along with the harvesting window (crop calendar) in the Bid Document,
Notification and on the NCIP. The crops not falling under the aforesaid category/not
included in the tender shall not be included later for post-harvest loss cover.
21.6.4 Eligibility Criteria
21.6.4.1 This Add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notified by the State/UT
Government.
21.6.4.2 Available to all insured farmers, at farm unit level, affected by above mentioned
perils in a Notified Insurance Unit, growing notified crops for which insurance have
been availed.
21.6.4.3 Available for all notified crops which has been declared eligible for post-harvest
losses as per the Government notification and damaged by specified perils during the
process of drying in the field in "cut and spread condition"/small, bundled conditions
up to a period of 14 days from harvest. States/UTs shall also notify the onset of
harvesting period of each crop.
21.6.4.4 Only those farmers would be eligible for financial support under this cover who have
paid the premium i.e. the premium has been debited from their account before the
occurrence of the insured peril.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
111

--- Page 112 ---
21.6.4.5 Maximum liability is limited to the maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
crop’s area and the pay-out under this provision would be in proportion to the loss
incurred on the crop in the insured plot, up to the occurrence of the insured peril.
21.6.4.6 Payout under this peril will be as per the payment modalities given in the Annexure
V of these Guidelines.
21.6.5 Proxy-Indicators: Weather data from WINDS network, IMD weather reports,
hailstorm incidences substantiated by local media reports or reports of the Agriculture/
Revenue Department supported by media reports and other evidence. A detailed
SOP/Manual and modalities for setting up crop-specific weather-parameter triggers
as a first level of qualifying mechanism for conducting physical loss assessment
surveys shall be notified by the GoI separately.
21.6.6 Loss Assessment Procedure
21.6.6.1 Time and method of reporting the loss/claims:
A. The State/UT Government would notify crop-wise and the agro-climatic zone or
district-wise onset of harvesting dates/harvesting period during which, this
provision could be invoked. In the case of any event occurring beyond these
dates/this period, this provision shall not be applicable under any circumstances.
B. Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer to Insurance Company
through "Crop Insurance App" or any available channel of reporting as detailed in Para
21.6.6.4 below.
C. Intimation must contain details of insured farmer's name, affected land parcel/ survey
no. wise insured crop and acreage affected, Farmer's Application No as on NCIP,
his/her Mobile Number, etc. KCC A/c No. (in case of loanee farmer) or Saving bank
Account (in case of non-Loanee farmer as declared at the time of applying for crop
insurance) for identification and verification purpose.
D. Premium payment verification to be done from the portal and in case required, may be
verified from the bank and bank shall provide the payment verification within next 48
hours of receipt of such request.
E. Mobile application based "Crop Insurance App" may be used for reporting an
incidence of a post-harvest providing details of longitude/latitude and pictures.
21.6.6.2 Post-harvest losses claim amount at individual farm level shall be calculated as per
the following formula:
𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒂𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝒐𝒖𝒕 𝒐𝒇 𝑬𝒔𝒕𝒊𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑪𝒓𝒐𝒑 𝑫𝒂𝒎𝒂𝒈𝒆
𝑺𝒖𝒎 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 × (%) × (%)
𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒊𝒏 𝑨𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂
21.6.6.3 For estimation of crop loss in the individual farms/land parcels, the digital mobile
App developed by the GoI shall be compulsorily used by the Insurance Companies,
States/UTs and loss surveyors appointed by the concerned Insurance Companies.
21.6.6.4 Channel of reporting, i.e. Whom to be reported: Intimation may be given within
72 hours by the farmer either directly through the "Crop Insurance App" or on
dedicated centralized toll-free number of Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline (14447).
The intimation may also be forwarded through the concerned bank branch, local
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
112

--- Page 113 ---
agriculture department Government/district officials. The first mode of intimation
should be the "Crop Insurance App" and the centralized Toll-Free Number (KRPH)
for this purpose. This can be followed by intimation through the bank or district
officials to Insurance Company for conducting the individual level loss assessment.
The concerned bank/intermediary, if asked by the Insurance Companies would
verify the insured details like crop insured, sum insured, premium debited and date
of debit & remittance and share with the Insurance Company for conducting the crop
loss assessment.
21.6.6.5 Reporting of losses will be done primarily through the Crop Insurance App and the
Centralized Toll-Free Number (14447), along with other channels. Other channels
will be phased out subsequently.
21.6.6.6 In case the intimation has been given through the concerned bank branch or
State/UT Government officials, the same shall be forwarded by the Bank Branches
or Govt. officials of the concerned Insurance Company within the next 48 hours
through available channels or Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline.
21.6.7 Documentary Evidence required for Loss Assessment
21.6.7.1 A duly filled intimation through Crop Insurance App or Krishi Rakshak Portal &
Helpline or any other conventional channels along with all relevant documents is
necessary for initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims. However, if
information against all the columns is not readily available, partial information may
be sent to the Insurance Company and later within 7days of the loss, the complete
details may be submitted.
21.6.7.2 The Insurance Companies are responsible for ensuring that sufficient number of loss
intimation forms are available at the bank branch & local Government officials level.
Any other additional documents can be collected directly from the farmer at the time
of loss assessment by the representative/surveyor of the Insurance Company.
Insurance Company shall complete all formalities and collect any ancillary
information required for the payment of such claims, like local newspaper cutting
and any other available evidence to substantiate the occurrence of loss event and
severity of the loss, if any.
21.6.7.3 Weather data report from the WINDS network, Special Report (SR) under YES-
TECH, IMD reports, Media reports, Local Newspaper cuttings to substantiate
occurrence of loss event and severity of the loss, if any.
21.6.8 Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company
21.6.8.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the Insurance Company for assessment
of post-harvest losses. The loss assessors appointed by the Insurance Companies
should be in accordance with the IRDAI provisions. The loss assessors appointed
should possess following experience and qualification:
 Diploma/degree in any subject with minimum 2 years relevant experience or
bachelor’s degree in agriculture and allied subjects with one year experience.
 Retired Government officials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension Department
having Diploma/B.Sc.(Ag.) degree.
 Retired Bank officials with experience of Agriculture Value Chain financing or Kisan
Credit Card (KCC).
21.6.8.2 For compliance under the above provisions the Insurance Companies would utilize
the empaneled loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
113

--- Page 114 ---
21.6.8.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team comprising of loss assessor appointed
by the insurer, block level agriculture officer, primary worker of the agriculture or
revenue department and the concerned farmer. Loss assessment surveys shall be
conducted by the Joint Committee, at each individual field level, through the Mobile
App specifically developed for the same by the GoI. The loss assessment data shall
be uploaded on the NCIP on a real time basis to arrive at the Claim amount of the
eligible insured farmers.
21.6.9 Time Frame for Loss Assessment and Submission of Report
A. Appointment of the loss assessor within 48 hours from the receipt of information.
B. Loss assessment to be completed within next 10 days.
C. Claim settlement/payment to the farmers to be completed in next 15 days (subject
to receipt of premium) from the time of receipt of loss assessment report.
D. Maximum liability is limited to the maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
crop's area and the pay-out under this provision would be in proportion to the total
loss incurred on the crop in the insured plot, up to the occurrence of the insured peril.
E. Intimation of crop losses is compulsory for individual insured farmers through various
channels in case of losses due to specified localized calamities. If the intimation of
crop losses due to specified localized calamities is received by the State
Governments/UT Administrations, then they will enter the data of intimations of crop
losses in a form that can be uploaded in the KRPH and provide the same to
Insurance Company along with copies of the intimations received. The Insurance
Company shall reconcile the total intimations data by comparing with the number of
insured farmers in a notified insurance unit.
F. If the insured area of an IU under loss intimation as compared to the total insured
area for that particular crop in the IU is less than 25%, then an individual survey of
all the farmers shall have to necessarily be done. This assessment shall have to be
done for each insured crop individually in the IU.
G. Wide-Spread Post Harvest Losses: : If the Insured area under loss intimation under
localized calamity claims in an IU is more than 25% of the total Insured area in the
IU during a specific weather event having a single/similar peril, then the event shall
be considered as Wide-Spread Localized calamity and the sample loss survey will
be conducted at 10 different randomly selected crop-land parcels using the loss
intimation list across the affected Insurance Unit and average loss percentage basis
the sample survey shall be applicable to all intimations for the given IU during the
specific weather event. In this case, the losses will not be considered as individual
and will be presumed widespread. Therefore, the claims shall be disbursed to all
eligible insured farmers (who have given intimation/for whom intimation has been
received/accepted) in accordance with the crop loss assessment arrived at following
the below tabular grid. Accordingly, loss assessment and claim disbursement shall
be done as per
below:
(Average Area Affected %age X Average Crop Loss %) 𝑿 Sum Insured X 25%
H. For the purpose of defining the weather event, loss of or damage to the insured crop
under PMFBY arising from a single weather peril active during any given period shall
be deemed as a single event until there is a break in continuity of occurrence of the
same peril for 72 consecutive hours, i.e. if there is not a break of more than 72 hours
between events under a similar peril, such events shall be considered as a single
event for calculation of event period.
I. The tentative sample size would be as under:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
114

--- Page 115 ---
Intimation (Insured area under notified
Survey
crop)
Less than 25% All Intimations would be surveyed
>25% Sample survey at IU crop level as per mid-
season Adversity provisions
21.6.10 Conditions
21.6.10.1 Mere disbursement/sanction of loan without the receipt/debit of premium before the
occurrence of insured peril would not make a farmer eligible for a claim.
21.6.10.2 When affected area is limited up to 25% of the total insured area for the season in
the notified insurance unit, the losses of eligible farmers would be assessed
individually provided they have paid the premium prior to the occurrence of an
insurance peril. Intimation is a pre-condition to get the benefit for localized claim.
Intimations received during the time of survey would also be considered.
21.6.10.3 If the affected area under a notified crop is more than 25% of the total insured area
in a notified insurance unit, all the eligible farmers who have taken insurance for the
notified crop, which has been damaged, and informed about the occurrence of a
calamity in the individual insured farm/land parcel within the stipulated time in the
notified Insurance Unit (IU), would be deemed to have suffered localized loss and
would be eligible for financial support under post-harvest loss. The percentage of
loss would be arrived at by Insurance Company through a requisite number of
sample survey as defined in the detailed protocol for the add-on cover.
21.6.10.4 The eligibility of claim settlement shall be decided based on the outcome of the joint
loss assessment surveys carried out by representatives of the Insurance Company,
District Administration/State Government’s/UT Administration’s nodal department
and farmers. Further if affected area is more than 25% of the total insured area and
there is dispute or disagreement between the stakeholders regarding the quantum
or extent of the loss reported by the Joint Loss Assessment committee, the claim
calculation will be done using technology derived solutions involving
weather/remote-sensing indices along with the loss assessment surveys with
weightage of 70% and 30% respectively, for assessment and evaluation of
final extent of loss. The acceptance of the technology driven extent of loss will
be binding on all stakeholders.
21.6.10.5 STAC in coordination with State Remote Sensing Application Centre or TIP
appointed under YES-TECH (for the crops notified under Crop Model Matrix (CMM))
will conduct assessment of loss as mentioned in Para 21.6.10.4 based on the
protocol developed by MNCFC or mentioned in YES-TECH manual, as the case
maybe. STAC may take the help of MNCFC if they desire.
21.6.10.6 The pay-out under the cover would be disbursed by the Insurance Company only
after the receipt of 2nd tranche of the Government share of premium subsidy (both
the State/UT Government and the GoI Share).
21.6.10.7 The Insurance Company would disburse the claim, if payable, within 15 days of the
receipt of the loss survey report.
21.6.10.8 Farmers getting enrolled or whose premium is debited after the occurrence of
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
115

--- Page 116 ---
insurance peril or data has not been uploaded on NCIP would not be eligible for
financial support under this cover.
21.6.11 Detailed Procedure and Timelines for Payment of Post-Harvest Loss is
Mentioned in Table 11 below:
Action to be taken
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Schedule for taking action
by
Intimation may be given within 72
hours by the farmer either through
Crop Insurance App, Krishi
Rakshak Portal & Helpline, directly
to the Insurance Company through
its dedicated toll-free number or
through the concerned bank, local
agriculture department
Government/ district officials.
However, the first mode of
intimation should be either crop
insurance app or Krishi Rakshak
Portal & Helpline.
In case the intimation has been
given through concerned bank
branch or Government officials, the
same shall be forwarded within the Affected farmer(s)
next 48 hours to the Insurance may intimate using
Company. mobile, landline or
social media.
Intimation about occurrence of
Farmer should provide
localized perils/ calamities viz.
his bank account
Hailstorm, Cyclone, Cyclonic Rains
number (loan account Within 72 hours from the
1 and Unseasonal Rains may be
for loanee farmer and occurrence of peril.
given up to harvest date as notified
savings account for
in the State/UT Notification and
non-loanee farmer) or
supported by information of
application number
WINDS, IMD / local media, and
generated from the
Reports of Agriculture / Revenue
portal at the time of
Departments, Media Reports.
intimation.
The individual crop losses due to
occurrence of localized perils within
15 days of onset of harvest will be
treated as Post-harvest Losses
provided that the said crop has
been notified for Post-harvest Loss
cover. However, if the crop has
been harvested prior to the onset of
harvest and if the crop has been cut
and is lying on the field in such
cases the calamity would fall under
the post-harvest losses provided
the said crop has been notified for
the post-harvest cover and it would
only be considered for crops which
are required to be kept on the field
for drying up maximum for a period
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
116

--- Page 117 ---
Action to be taken
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Schedule for taking action
by
of two weeks (14 days).
During the Harvest Period window,
intimations for post-harvest losses
shall be treated as separate risks
beyond CCE based loss and losses
shall be assessed accordingly as
per applicable provisions of the
Operational Guidelines.
Forwarding information / intimation Bank/PACS, Local
Within 48 hours from the
of the farmer(s) to Insurance Agriculture
2 receipt of the information /
Company by KRPH or other Department / District
intimation from the farmer(s).
alternate mechanism. officials.
Appointment of loss assessor as Within 48 hours from the
3 per qualifications & experience laid Insurance company receipt the of information /
down in the OGs of PMFBY. intimation.
Assessment of affected area in
4 DLJC
term of % of total insured area.
Jointly by the loss Within 10 days of the
Individual level assessment of loss
assessor, block level appointment of the loss
5 (in case the affected area is < 25%
agriculture officer and assessor by the company.
of the total insured area).
affected farmer(s).
Verification of the details of the
affected insured farmer(s) from Within 7 days of the intimation
6 Insurance company
bank using NCIP or any other of loss.
alternate mechanism.
Within 15 days from receipt of
loss assessment report
subject to receipt of full
Claim-payment to affected
7 Insurance company Government share of subsidy
intimated farmer(s).
(2nd tranche of both the
State/UT Government and the
GoI).
Data of the Loss assessment report
finalized by DLJC, and admissible
8 claims will be uploaded on the Insurance company Within 7 days of the Survey.
NCIP against the farmer from
whom loss intimation was received.
Protocol for Area based Assessment: If affected area>25% of total insured Area
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
117

--- Page 118 ---
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by Schedule for taking action
Fulfillment of eligibility of post-
harvest losses on area-based
loss assessment (i.e. affected
area is >25% of the total insured
crop area) is to be decided
based on the occurrence of any
Definitions & interpretations of
one of the Proxy Indicators:-
proxy indicators would be
 Wide-spread applied as per IMD's
unseasonal/excess rainfall. guidelines as below:
 Wide-spread cyclones/cyclonic
1 rains. DLJC %age w.r.t. LPA.
 Wide-spread hailstorm/hailing.
 Losses impacting > 25% of the Abnormal Weather Parameter:
(±) 20 or more deviation than
insured crop area*.
the
Supported by Satellite Image
Long Period Average.
and Satellite Index based
outputs to be provided by MITR,
ISRO/SAC, MNCFC or MITR’s
under YES-TECH, Government
crop condition reports, and
media reports, etc.
Meeting of the DLJC to be
Keeping watch over the convened. Relevant data to be
breaching of set triggers of placed before the Committee.
proxy indicators as mentioned The decision should be taken
District Agriculture /
above. Meeting of the DLJC to within 7 days from the
Horticulture / Revenue
2 be convened on the breaching occurrence of adverse
Officer (i.e. convener
of any one of the above triggers seasonal event
of DLJC).
of unseasonal rainfall, cyclone &communicated through a
or cyclonic rainfall and letter for conducting loss
hailstorm/hailing. assessment surveys in the
listed IUs.
Physical loss assessment Within 15 days of the letter
survey to be carried out for at received for carrying out the
3 To be done by DLJC.
least the sample size loss assessment surveys by
(mentioned in Para 21.6.8). the DLJC.
Written notice within 7 days to
be submitted to the Chairman-
DLMC with proofs/data/reports
substantiating the claim. The
DLMC to review the
Dispute/Disagreement raised by reports/evidence and resolve
any stakeholder on the process the dispute within 7 days. In
4 Any Stakeholder
of Loss Assessment Survey or case the dispute is unresolved,
Extent of assessed loss. the affected stakeholder can
make an appeal to State Nodal
Department, thereafter to
STAC, as per the process
defined in the Grievance
Redressal mechanism.
Assessment of likely losses and Within one month from the
5 Insurance Company
finalization of claims payment date of the DLJC letter to carry
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
118

--- Page 119 ---
Sl. No. Action required to be taken Action to be taken by Schedule for taking action
based on the joint survey. out the loss assessment
surveys subject to receipt of
full Government share of
6 Payment to eligible farmers. subsidy (2nd tranche of both
the State/UT Government and
the GoI).
Data of loss assessment
finalized by DLJC and
admissible claims will be
7 Insurance Company Within 7 days of the survey.
uploaded on the NCIP against
farmer from whom loss
intimation has been received.
*Note3: If affected area is more than 25% of the insured area of notified crop in
notified insurance unit then the losses are not eligible as individual and are
presumed to be widespread, therefore claim to all eligible insured farmers (who have
given intimation/for whom intimation has been received) would be paid ad-hoc.
Illustration
• A - Sum Insured for a crop=Rs.30,000
• B - % area affected out of the total area insured = 100%
• C - %crop loss estimated in affected area basis joint physical survey = 80%
• D - Claims payable = A x B x C = Rs. 30,000 x 100% x 80% = Rs. 24,000/-
21.7 Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of Similar or Different Perils
21.7.1 There have been instances of multiple perils happening over the course of a crop
season in an IU, or simultaneously during the crop harvesting window affecting same
crop-land parcel or application, leading to complexities in damage assessment and
claim calculation. Accordingly, the detailed modalities of claim assessment and
settlement in case of multiple events being triggered under similar or different perils
are described below.
21.7.2 The claim events under PMFBY (including RWBCIS) have been divided into three
wider categories on the basis of approach and applicability of these events:
A. Wide-Spread Events with Policy Termination feature --- Preventive Sowing/Failed
Germination
B. Individual Events — Localized Calamity and Post-Harvest losses
C. Wide Spread Events — Mid Season Adversity and Yield Based losses
21.7.3 In the event that the Claims for a same crop-Land parcel or application are triggered
under different types of coverages viz., Localized Calamities, Mid-season adversity,
post-harvest losses and final yield based claim (Basic Cover), then the final claim
assessment shall be done by either adjusting the claims in case of identical covers
or by reducing the sum insured in case the claims are triggered under different types
of covers.
21.7.4 In case multiple events affecting same crop-Land parcel or application are triggered
under the identical covers, differential claim amount will be paid without reducing the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
119

--- Page 120 ---
Sum Insured. i.e., the Sum Insured will remain intact, and the claims will be adjusted
against the previous paid claim with the principle that highest payable claim shall be
paid at any given point in time. The different scenarios are given below:
a. In case of multiple localized calamity events,
b. A combination of widespread events:
 Mid-season adversity and Yield-Based Claim (Basic Cover)
 A combination of Mid-season adversity, Wide-Spread Localized Calamities and
Yield-Based Claim (Basic Cover).
21.7.5 In case of multiple claim events are triggered under different covers in combinations
other than those specified above, then the available sum insured for the subsequent
perils would be derived by reducing the amount of claim already paid in the preceding
loss event. Accordingly, the claim under the subsequent event shall be calculated on
balance left-out Sum Insured only. The different scenarios are given below:
a. Localized Calamity events and Yield-Based Claim,
b. Yield-Based Claims and Post-Harvest losses,
c. Localized Calamity and Post-Harvest losses
d. Localized Calamity and Mid-Season Adversity,
e. Mid-season Adversity and Post-Harvest Losses
21.7.6 After the initial event the balance Sum Insured for any given application only shall be
utilized to ascertain the payable claims in future events using the above modality.
The final yield-based claim under the Basic Cover, therefore, shall be computed
based on Yield shortfall multiplied by available balance of Sum Insured at the stage
of final yield-based claim settlement.
21.7.7 Under Para 21.7.2 (A) above, where the clause of Preventive Sowing/Failed
Germination is triggered, the insurance cover will cease to exist and therefore there
is no possibility of any further claims, whereas under Para 21.7.2 (B) & (C), the
interplay can happen more than once within same IU for same crop & season.
Accordingly, the eligibility and claims shall be calculated and paid by the concerned
Insurance Companies as defined in Para 21.7.3 to 21.7.6 above. A multi-event claim
calculation flowchart is appended below for more clarity. Further detailed illustration
of the same is placed at Annexure-V of these Operational Guidelines.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
120

--- Page 121 ---
21.7.8 Multi-Event Multi-Peril Claim Calculation Flowchart:
Claim Reported
Is this multi-peril
claim reported on No Calculate the claim by multiplying
Same Land %age with Notified SI & pay as
Parcel-Same Crop per applicable provisions.
& Same Season?
Yes
If previous claim was
Local ized:
Calculate the claim by If previous claim was Localized:
multip lying loss% with Balance Calculate the claim by multiplying
SI arrived after reducing MSA Claim loss % with notified SI & reduce the
previously paid localized previously paid localized claim
claim /s from current claim and pay the
If previous claim was MSA: What type of balance
Calcu late the claim by subsequent claim If previous claim was MSA:
multiplying loss% with balance has been received? Calculate the claim by multiplying
SI arrived after reducing Localized Claim loss % with balance SI arrived after
previo usly paid localized reducing previously paid claim
claim/s & reduce the previously under MSA, further reduce the
paid MSA claim from current previously paid localized claim
MSA claim and pay the balance from current claim and pay the
balance
Post-Harvest
Claim
Calculate the claim by multiplying
loss% with Balance SI arrived
after reducing previously paid
localized and mid-season claim /s
Final Yield Claim
Calculate the cla im by
Step 1:
M aftu el rt i rp el dy uin cg
in
y gi e pl rd
e
vlo ios us s%
ly
w pait ih
d
B loa cl aa ln izc ee
d
S &I a Prr oiv ste d Yes yI is
e
t lh de bre
as
a en dy
C
f li an ia ml No
Season ends
Harvest claims,
also?
Step 2:
Reduce the previously paid claim under Mid-
season and pay the balance
22 Participation of Loss Assessors/Evaluators for Loss Assessment
under the Scheme
22.1 Empanelment Criteria
22.1.1 The agencies having relevant field experience, financial and infrastructural strength,
sufficient skilled manpower having diploma in any subject with minimum 2 years of
relevant experience or a Bachelor’s Degree in Agriculture and allied subjects with
one year relevant experience in rural/crop insurance, crop loss assessment and
having desired operational capabilities shall be empaneled by the GoI as a Loss
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
121

--- Page 122 ---
Assessment Agency.
22.1.2 Once loss assessment agency has been empaneled by the GoI, it will be considered
as a pre-qualified company to participate and engage with the concerned State/UT
Government and Insurance Companies to undertake loss assessment under the
provisions of the Scheme, however concerned agency will be responsible for
maintaining the quality of services being delivered by them.
22.1.3 Once empaneled, the performance of such agencies will be evaluated every season
against vital parameters defined in the monitoring and evaluation framework notified
by the GoI and the non-performing agencies shall be de-empaneled for a period of
2 consecutive seasons. The de-empaneled agency shall be required to get
empaneled again to provide the services under the scheme.
22.1.4 Detailed guidelines for the empanelment and accreditation of loss assessment
agencies shall be prepared and notified by the GoI separately. These guidelines will
enable empanelment and de-empanelment of agencies based on set performance
parameters to maintain desired quality and standardization of protocols and
processes related to crop loss assessment.
22.1.5 As loss assessment is a vital activity under the Scheme and forms the basis of claims
settlement, any malpractice, manipulation or misreporting is non-acceptable and
shall be taken very seriously. Accordingly, an appropriate legal and administrative
action shall be taken against the agencies and individuals associated with such
agencies. Loss assessment agencies shall follow the guidelines issued by the GoI
while engaging in PMFBY implementation.
22.1.6 In order to develop the capacity of the loss assessment agencies and to create a
large pool of Certified Crop Loss Assessors (CCLAs) at national level, GoI shall
design a LMS based open online course/certification for crop loss assessors. The
individual loss assessors employed by the loss assessment agencies shall
mandatorily complete this certification before conducting loss assessment surveys
under PMFBY.
22.1.7 The loss assessment agencies shall be provided with a transition period of One/Two
Years to create a pool of Certified Crop Loss Assessors (CCLA), after which the
Loss assessment agencies shall mandatorily employ or engage the CCLAs only, for
crop loss assessment under PMFBY.
23 Procedure for Settlement of Claims to the Farmers
23.1 The Insurance Company should have received the final share of Government
subsidy (2nd tranche), both Central and State, on the basis of the enrollment data
basis the applications approved on the NCIP to enable the settlement of Actual
Yield-based claims arising out of wide-spread calamity as well as post-harvest
losses. However, for the settlement of payment of claims under add-on covers viz.
MSA & Localized Calamities, advance subsidy (1st tranche) of 50% of the advance
upfront premium subsidy of the Central and the State Governments/UT
Administrations based on the corresponding previous season’s premium or current
season’s premium as the case may be as per Para 6.1.7 of the operational
guidelines shall be sufficient to pay the claims.
23.2 State Governments/UT Administrations shall compulsorily upload the Threshold
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
122

--- Page 123 ---
Yield and Actual Yield data for all Crop-IUs on NCIP for all notified crops which shall
also be verified and accepted by the concerned Insurance Company within the given
timelines. In order to avoid manipulation or misuse of the information at field
level, Threshold Yield values for the Crop-IU and season shall never be shared
publicly by the State/UT or primary worker or Insurance Company with anyone
and this information shall never be a part of public information before the
payment of yield-based claims for that season.
23.3 The DLMC will be required to upload or enter the details of crop loss as per the Joint
Loss Survey conducted by DLJC for all intermediate loss events viz. prevented
sowing/planting/germination failure &Mid-season Adversity on the NCIP. Similarly,
the crop loss details for localized losses and post-harvest loss events shall be
entered by the concerned Insurance Company on the Portal. Once the Actual Yield
data is available on the NCIP, the same shall be verified and approved by the
concerned District and State authorities in sequence. For those experiments which
were conducted offline and without the use of mobile application, the Actual Yield
data shall also be uploaded by the concerned District administration on NCIP which
subsequently shall be approved by the State/UT nodal department on the NCIP
itself. All the estimations of Yield and crop loss assessments shall be uploaded
within the stipulated timeline on the NCIP by the concerned stakeholders as
envisaged above. The admissible claims shall be calculated on the NCIP. The
status of claim payment and the claim amount shall accordingly be made
available on NCIP for stakeholders to track and validate.
23.4 The loss reports and Actual Yield data shall be approved or reverted (in case of any
discrepancy or /concern on the authenticity and correctness of the report and data)
by the Insurance Company. Based on the loss reports of add-on claims and actual
yield data, eligible claims shall be calculated through the NCIP and accordingly the
payment of claims shall be initiated by the concerned Insurance Company and
remitted directly into the beneficiary account as per the pre-defined process and
timelines using the PFMS platform developed for initiating financial transactions. The
application-wise payment details viz. amount, reference number, date etc. shall be
synchronized with the National Crop Insurance Portal for future reference &
reconciliation.
23.5 In case of wide-spread calamity (end of season claims), once yield data is finalized
and received from the State/UT Government as per the decided cut-off-dates and is
uploaded, approved and accepted on NCIP, claims shall be calculated on the NCIP
for approved applications in each notified area and crops as available on NCIP.
Accordingly, the claims will be approved by the Competent Authority of the
implementing Insurance Company and all claims will be initiated through Public
Financial Management System (PFMS) platform developed for initiating financial
transactions. The application-wise payment details viz. Amount, Reference Number,
Date etc. shall be synchronized with the NCIP for validation, audit and future
reference purposes.
23.6 In case the CCE data submitted through CCE Agri App is not approved within the
stipulated timelines, it will be auto- approved and used for claim calculation. In case
of non-submission of Actual Yield (AY) data by the State/UT Government to the
implementing insurance companies within the stipulated timelines, Synthetic Yield
data computed through technology-based solutions shall be used for calculating
admissible claims and subsequent settlement of claims to the eligible farmers. The
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
123

--- Page 124 ---
cut-off date for submission of yield data to insurance companies is normally two
months after completion of harvesting of a particular crop.
23.7 In case of farmers (loanee) covered by financial Institutions, claims shall be released
only electronically through NCIP using PFMS platform directly into insured farmer's
given loan or saving bank account. The claim settlement details shall also be
available on NCIP for the individual Bank Branches and Nodal Banks to access and
validate. Bank Branch should spread awareness and motivation amongst farming
community to opt for enrollment under the scheme. In case of failure of claim
remittance due to earlier account number being wrong, the applications shall be
enabled for the concerned bank branch for updating the correct or new bank account
details of the farmer and accordingly the claims shall be initiated into new account
number as per process defined above. For the closed accounts or failure of claims
in updated account numbers, the claims shall be initiated through Aadhaar Enabled
Payment System (AEPS) directly into Aadhaar ceded bank account number of
beneficiary farmer.
23.8 In case of farmers (non-loanee) covered through Insurance intermediaries or CSC
or any other enrollment channel, Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AEPS) shall
be used mandatorily as primary mode of payment of claims directly into Aadhaar
ceded bank account number of beneficiary farmer through NCIP using PFMS
platform. In case of failure of claim remittance using AEPS, the claims shall be
initiated in the saving bank account entered on NCIP at the time of enrollment. In
case of failure of claim remittance into bank account and through AEPS, the
applications shall be enabled for the concerned Insurance Companies for updating
the correct or new bank account details of the farmer and accordingly the claims
shall be initiated into new bank account number as per process defined above.
23.9 For change of account numbers, a certificate/declaration shall be required to be
submitted by the concerned farmer to the Insurance Company containing the revised
and updated banking details and being the rightful recipient of the claims.
23.10 In case of demise or the insured farmer, the applications shall be enabled for the
concerned Insurance Companies for updating the new bank account details of the
legal heir of the insured farmer and accordingly the applicable claim amount shall
be initiated by the Insurance Company to the legal heir of the insured farmer subject
to submission of legal heir certificate and certificate/declaration by the legal heir of
the insured farmer about rightful recipient of the claim amount and containing the
relevant banking details.
23.11 In case the eligible claims could not be remitted by the Insurance Company to the
concerned insured farmer during 6 consecutive seasons despite due attempts and
efforts have been made to trace the farmer & collect banking details, the said claim
amount shall be remitted to the FIAT account maintained by GoI. Further, in the
previous years, a special dispensation was given by GoI to the States to open the
Escrow Accounts to pool all such claim funds from Insurance Companies which
could not be remitted into the loan/saving bank account or Aadhaar seeded accounts
of eligible beneficiaries. In case there are unclaimed/accumulated funds in these
Escrow accounts for immediately preceding 6 seasons which could not be remitted
to their rightful beneficiaries despite due attempts and efforts have been made to
trace the farmer & collect banking details, such funds along with accumulated
interest shall also be remitted to FIAT fund maintained by GoI,
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
124

--- Page 125 ---
23.12 In case of claims under prevented/failed sowing, localized calamities, post-harvest
losses; Insurance Company will process the claims after assessment and shall
release the claims as per detailed procedure given in the relevant sections above.
23.13 The claim settlement intimation shall be sent to each beneficiary farmer through
SMS initiated through NCIP and an intimation through Chatbot platform shall also
be initiated to the farmers. State Governments/UT Administrations, CSCs, Banks &
Insurance Companies shall ensure the accuracy of the data beforehand viz.
Threshold Yield, Actual Yield, Insured Area, Sum Insured and Indemnity levels etc.
Responsibility of any error, omissions and misreporting shall lie with the concerned
State Nodal Department, Banks, CSCs and Insurance Companies as per their
relevant roles and responsibilities defined under these Operational Guidelines. State
Governments/UT Administrations, Banks, CSC-VLEs and Insurance Companies
shall resolve all the grievances of the insured farmers and other stakeholders in the
shortest possible time.
23.14 In any situation, the State/UT Government cannot reopen or re-calculate already
assessed and disbursed claims after 30 days from the time of claim settlement for
the notified crop(s) at the notified insurance unit. However, all States/UTs may
compulsorily audit the calculation and payment of claims to the eligible farmers at
the earliest and complete the process within One Month. In the case of disputed or
sub-standard claims, due to erroneous data, the matter may be referred to State
Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) or STAC within this
time and further to the central Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), if required, for
consideration and appropriate decision.
23.15 All the details of the farmers pertaining to payment of claims shall be verified through
PFMS before initiating the claim payment on NCIP. Applications with invalidated
bank accounts and Aadhaar Numbers shall be enabled for re-entry of account
numbers as per the process defined above.
23.16 The State/UT may define the minimum claim amount per farmer as threshold for all
the seasons below which the claims shall be held back by the insurance companies.
The claims above this threshold amount may be disbursed directly to the farmers’
account. The State/UTs may exercise any one of the following options and inform
GoI regarding the same well before the timelines for initiating the claims for the
season:
23.16.1 Option 1 – The amount below the defined threshold may be transferred to FIAT
account maintained by the GoI.
23.16.2 Option 2 – The State/UTs may top-up the actual claim amount from their own budget
to meet the defined minimum threshold.
23.16.3 Option 3 - The State/UTs may retain the claim amount below the defined threshold
and add to the claim amount of the same farmer in the next season(s).
24 Important Conditions/ Clauses Applicable for Coverage of Risks
24.1 Insurance Companies shall receive the premium for coverage either from the bank,
channel partner, CSC-VLE, insurance intermediary or directly. In case of any error
in data entry or non-entry of relevant data on NCIP due to negligence by these
agencies or non-remittance of premium by these agencies, the concerned agency
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
125

--- Page 126 ---
shall be liable for payment of eligible claims.
24.2 In case of any substantial misreporting by nodal bank /branch with respect to
loanee farmers coverage which may include incorrect insured and sown acreage
and survey number details, bank account details & IU details etc., the concerned
bank only shall be liable for such misreporting.
24.3 Mere sanctioning/disbursement of crop loans and the submission of relevant data
on NCIP and remittance of premium by the farmer or bank, without explicit intent to
raise the crop or without having raised the said crop on the insured land parcel, shall
not mean eligibility of such farmer for coverage under the scheme and also shall not
constitute acceptance of risk by the concerned Insurance Company.
24.4 The acceptance of risk and payment of claims by Insurance Company shall be purely
based on the provisions of these Guidelines and no other guidelines or modalities
of any other scheme of Central/State/UT Government or terms and conditions of any
other product of Insurance Companies shall be referred to or adopted by the
States/UTs or Insurance Companies.
25 Acreage Discrepancy
25.1 Some areas across the country in the past have reported excess insurance
coverage vis-à-vis planted or sown acreage, leading to over-insurance. Any
discrepancy in coverage of excess area should be handled at the individual unique
applicant level to protect the interest of farmers with genuine insurance coverage.
All suitable measures shall be taken by concerned stakeholders for de-duplication
with the help of Aadhaar Number, land records including State/UT specific digital
land record platforms and data validation from Agri-stack system of the GoI, banks
records, revenue records and KCC loan application of insured farmers against the
details of individual insured farmers as available on NCIP. Integration of digitized
land records with the NCIP is ongoing to resolve the problem of multiple coverage
or excess coverage on the same parcel of land. Any misreporting in acreage will be
verified and validated by the concerned Insurance Companies with the Digital land
record portals of the States/UTs and the same can also be verified from the
concerned bank branches in case of loanee farmers .The scheme also covers the
risk of prevented sowing/germination failure which is not included in the final sowing
area furnished by the State/UT Government for arriving at end of season sown area
of respective crops during the season. Hence, the comparison of insured coverage
without removing prevented sowing/germination failure acreage with the final
season end sown area is not justifiable. However, misreporting of area insured or
misrepresentation of, non-cultivable or Govt./Temple land or cultivable land not
belonging to the insured farmer, as owned or leased land or farmers not sowing or
having no intention of raising the crop in the insured land parcel etc. should be
verified, de-duplicated and eliminated from the final coverage. For the purpose of
elimination of duplicate applications (application on same land parcel for same crop
and area for same farmer), the application enrolled though Banks as loanee farmers
shall get precedence over non-loanee application enrolled through any other
channel and therefore non-loanee application/s shall get rejected first. In case of
multiple enrolments either though banks as loanee farmer and/or non-loanee
farmers and non-loanee farmers through same or multiple channels, the LIFO
principle shall be applied, i.e. applications which has been enrolled last shall be
rejected first. The State/UT Government along with the District administration and
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
126

--- Page 127 ---
the Insurance Company should take appropriate measures for verification of
land/area sown at ground level. The Scheme also provides for the option to change
the insured crop by the insured farmers upto 2 days before the cut-off date for debit
of premium and enrollment of farmers. Hence, Bank Branches and other agencies
may publicize this provision adequately along with the consequences of over
insurance and malpractices in advance amongst the farmers.
25.2 The Insurance Companies should also verify sufficient number of insured land
parcels for each notified major crop by visiting those Insured fields and report the
same though mobile app to the GoI.
25.3 Under the scheme, notified crops are being insured by the Insurance Companies on
the basis of actuarial premium rate by sufficiently pricing the underlying risk, hence,
it is not their prerogative to reduce the Sum Insured and resultant claims on the
application of ACF. However, to rationalize the government subsidy, it is the
responsibility of all concerned stakeholders including farmers and financial
institutions to insure the crop which the farmer actually intends to sow or is actually
sown and to the extent of actual sown area. The option to change the insured crop
has also been provided under the scheme for reporting of crop(s) actually sown.
There is also a provision to indemnify the crop losses due to the localized perils on
the basis of a survey of individual land parcels under insured crops. Incorrect
reporting of insured crops i.e. if the crop actually sown and insured are different, may
lead to forfeiting of premium and rejection of application leading to denial of claims.
25.4 Any case of large-scale irregularities or anomalies regarding insurance of excess
area i.e. the insured area being more than the published sown area (i.e., the average
of the last three consecutive years) at Taluka level should compulsorily be brought
to the notice of the State/UT Government and the GoI. This should be submitted in
writing after the cut-off date of data entry on NCIP but before the period specified for
reconciliation with banks and other agencies so that the same may be examined by
the State/UT Government and rectified by the concerned bank and agencies
themselves before finalization of enrollment data for the season on NCIP.
25.5 In spite of all suitable measures taken by the Insurance Company for de-duplication
and elimination of ghost farmers or identification of excess area insured by the
individual farmers, all Insurance Companies have to necessarily report excess
insured area in the prescribed template to the concerned States/UT and GoI well
before the start of crop cutting experiments for verification of the issues raised by
the concerned Insurance Companies and for taking necessary corrective measures,
if required. It is the responsibility of the Insurance Company to verify the sown area
before the time prescribed for auto-approval of application. In case of any financial
loss incurred by the Government in respect to subsidy claimed against the non-
genuine or ghost applications, the Insurance Company shall be liable for making the
refund of Government subsidy premium, forfeiture of farmer’s premium and
depositing it to FIAT account maintained by the GoI. The decision for application of
ACF will be taken by the GoI based on the field reports submitted by Insurance
Company, thorough evaluation of the situation and the decision of the GoI in regard
to the applicability of discrepancy in insured area shall be binding on all. The
template for such reporting is given in Annexure-II.
25.6 If at all, ACF has to be applied in the case of established gross irregularities on
ground, until the land integration, ceding of land parcels with Aadhaar or Unique
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
127

--- Page 128 ---
Land Parcel Identification Number (ULPIN) and real-time reconciliation remains in
abeyance for development, the GoI will be allowed to apply the ACF only on those
major crops for which sown area at Block/Taluka level is available as per the
prescribed Standard Operating Procedure as defined below.
25.7 If the difference between insured area and sown area (maximum of preceding last
three years) is greater than 30% at the Block/Tehsil/Taluka level, the matter should
be compulsorily brought to the notice of the MoA&FW, GoI in the prescribed format.
The GoI will examine these cases. If required, the CPMU and/or MNCFC will also
be asked to validate and provide crop sown area data for the same. The concerned
Insurance Company is required to provide requisite ground level data (at-least
covering 20 locations per block) collected using the Mobile App specially developed
for CROPIC initiative for Crop Health Monitoring by the GoI to generate crop
signatures for accurate enumeration of area sown data at Block/Tehsil level. The
data of the revised insured area for the application of ACF, if any shall be uploaded
on NCIP as well.
25.8 Accordingly, after scrutiny, excess insured area, if any shall be treated as un-insured
and corresponding farmer's premium will be forfeited. The same will be surrendered
to the FIAT Fund maintained by the GoI and the same may be utilized for leveraging
technology in PMFBY to support technology-based solutions, research and Impact
assessment projects etc., and towards assisting State/UTs to foster innovation and
adoption of various technology solutions as outlined in these Guidelines.
25.9 Premium subsidy surrendered by the Insurance Companies due to application of
ACF shall be refunded to the Central and State Governments/UT Administrations
respectively in their subsidy sharing ratio through Central Nodal Agency designated
by the GoI.
26 Information Education & Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building
26.1 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building activities
through awareness drives, campaigns, trainings and handholding support are the
focus areas under revamped PMFBY. It is imperative to create awareness about
PMFBY amongst farmers and bridge knowledge gaps among various implementing
stakeholders. As Insurance Companies are being allocated continuity of business
for long term i.e., for three years, they will have adequate time for awareness
generation and building capacities of the different stakeholders. Therefore,
systematic management of IEC and training activities is essential for a scheme like
PMFBY, where multiple stakeholders are involved at various stages of scheme
implementation. The primary target groups for conducting IEC and training and
capacity building activities are farmers, State level and district level officials of the
State Governments/UT Administrations, Banks, Primary Agriculture Co-operative
societies (PACS), Common Service Centers (CSCs)-VLEs, Insurance
Intermediaries, field functionaries and primary workers of different departments and
implementing Insurance Companies.
26.2 Major challenge in creating well informed ecosystem is the multiple layers of
hierarchy within each stakeholder and their different levels of understanding about
scheme implementation aspects. Thus, IEC and training needs of the stakeholders
are not uniform but vary in its functional areas. Since, different stakeholders
represent PMFBY to the farmers, any deficiency in the knowledge or services greatly
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
128

--- Page 129 ---
impacts the understanding and adoption of the scheme by the farmers,
implementation of scheme as per the protocols, understanding of different
technology aspects infused under the scheme and eventually the claim settlement
process. Since, the scheme has been made voluntary for all the farmers, it becomes
even more important to generate awareness about the benefits of the scheme, build
trust in the scheme and make efforts for ensuring faster and efficient service delivery
to the farmers to improve overall satisfaction amongst them, thus instilling behavioral
change towards creating an enabling environment in favor of the concept of risk
protection through insurance. Therefore, a robust awareness and capacity building
platform has great significance in streamlining and strengthening scheme
implementation.
26.3 It requires sensitization of higher authorities of the targeted stakeholders at the
National, State/UT, & district level, massive awareness generation and error free
implementation at the ground level throughout the season. It equally requires focus
on awareness and education of all stakeholders including farmers about all
implementation aspects of the scheme, right from scheme publicity, enrolment of
farmers, yield & loss assessment, claim calculation, claim settlement and addressing
grievances of farmers. Broad objective of IEC and capacity building is to build overall
literacy on crop insurance among the stakeholders and capacitate farmers to take
informed decisions.
26.4 Following would be the broad strategies for creating awareness and improve
knowledge about the scheme that shall be focused by GoI for desired outcomes:
26.4.1 All IEC and Training and Capacity Building activities need to be carried out in a multi-
pronged approach comprising of awareness generation at a mass level and
sensitization of key stakeholders at all levels through sensitization programs. The
approach will further comprise of engagement of stakeholders actively involved in
scheme implementation at the field level through continuous trainings and time to
time hand holding support. Additionally, greater emphasis shall be on developing long
term synergy with apex training institutes for knowledge management in crop
insurance ecosystem sector to make it sustainable and scalable for long term
education and creation of capacities.
26.4.2 At the beginning of each crop season, concerned Insurance Companies need to
prepare a stakeholder-wise micro level IEC and training activity plan and ensure strict
implementation of the same. The GoI will facilitate in finalizing the micro activity plan
in consultation with other stakeholders. It will also provide a standard template & SOP
detailing target groups, select activities to be undertaken, timeline, frequency,
responsibility etc. before the commencement of season.
26.4.3 The Insurance Companies shall undertake an exercise of activity mapping and
corresponding budget allocation for IEC and Training. This would help in planning
diverse activities with maximum outreach and concentrating on few select activities
with enhanced and long-term impact.
26.4.4 Adequate publicity and awareness generation needs to be conducted in all the
villages of the notified districts and IUs by all the implementing stakeholders in co-
ordination with each other. All possible means of mass communication such as, print,
digital traditional and social media may be utilized to create and disseminate
awareness about the provisions and benefits of the Scheme among the farmers and
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
129

--- Page 130 ---
the agencies involved in implementing the Scheme.
26.4.5 Awareness generation and training and capacity building activities need to be carried
out on regular basis starting from three months prior to the beginning of the enrolment
period till the claim settlement for a season. Insurance Companies need to start the
work immediately, within 15 days of award of contract and submit a comprehensive
plan to the concerned State Governments/UT Administrations and to the GoI.
26.4.6 Insurance Companies are required to prepare a dynamic social media calendar for
generating awareness and addressing issues raised on social media.
26.4.7 State Governments/UT Administrations shall facilitate all the implementing
stakeholders in organizing training & capacity building and sensitization workshops/
on key implementation activities on crop insurance under PMFBY/RWBCIS.
26.4.8 Insurance Companies shall earmark 0.5% of the Gross Written Premium for the
concerned season for expenses on publicity, awareness generation, training and
capacity building activities at the field level. Implementing Insurance Companies
need to submit corresponding details of expenses to the GoI and the respective State
Governments/UT Administrations at the end of every season.
26.4.9 A share of 0.25% of the total Gross Premium i.e. 50% out of the earmarked 0.5% of
the Gross Written Premium will be pooled at the central level in the form of a Central
IEC Pool Fund which shall be used for centralized efforts for doing various
awareness, educational and capacity building activities including creation of a
knowledge repository comprising of IEC and training material such as interactive
videos, short films, training manuals, booklets, brochures, pamphlets, e-learning
material and courses, its designing and dissemination, and creating a pool of
knowledgeable individuals at ground level. This would involve using existing
infrastructure by engaging apex training institutes at the National, Regional, State/UT
level, etc. For this purpose, an IEC advisory Committee has been constituted by GoI
comprising of members from Insurance Companies, Academia, State
Governments/UT Administrations and officials from DA&FW and CMPU which shall
function under the supervision of Joint Secretary/CEO-PMFBY to plan, design, curate
and undertake aforesaid activities while utilizing the central IEC Pool Funds for the
same.
26.4.10 The balance 0.25% of gross funds for IEC needs to be spent by Insurance
Companies on publicity, awareness generation, training and capacity building
activities about the scheme while synchronizing their efforts with the activities being
undertaken under the activities being planned and executed by the GoI at central
level. Any unspent balance of the concerned season shall be carried forward for IEC
activities during the next season.
26.4.11 Specific IEC needs of NER/Himalayan States and UTs may be taken up by the GoI
through IEC advisory committee on case-to-case basis and the GoI may direct the
concerned Insurance Company regarding the same.
26.4.12 All the publicity material/information/training material should necessarily be uploaded
on the NCIP or Mobile App specially designed by GoI along with the coverage,
frequency and duration etc., for better execution and effective monitoring.
26.4.13 Resources from Central IEC Pool Fund shall also be used to support the engagement
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
130

--- Page 131 ---
of apex/premier institutes at the national and state level having institutional
infrastructure and skilled human resources to impart training, developing e-learning
modules, organizing seminars, conferences, workshops on technical aspects and
conducting research on application of various technology and media interventions in
crop insurance for various stakeholders.
26.4.14 All the stakeholders are required to contribute in developing a pool of resource
persons/master trainers on the subject of crop insurance across the country.
26.4.15 Insurance Companies to contribute in building institutional capacities by providing
training and support to the Faculty Members of select apex/premier training institutes
(identified/empaneled by GoI) in the country. Infrastructure of these training institutes
may further be utilized for conducting trainings at its premises with the provision of
bearing course expenditure, boarding and lodging of participants and
faculties/resources persons and offering honorariums to faculties/resource persons.
26.4.16 Strict monitoring, tracking and impact assessment of all the activities planned and
executed through the Central IEC Pool Fund at National and State/UT level shall be
done periodically for ensuring efficiencies of such activities and for enabling the
corrective measures to ensure the desired outcomes.
27 Service Charges
27.1 All payments of commission, rewards & service charges by the Insurance Company
to Banks, CSC eGov & Insurance Intermediaries etc. shall be subject to the
applicable circulars and regulations issued by the GoI and the IRDAI from time to
time.
27.2 Even if the farmer's share of premium is contributed or/financed by the concerned
State Governments/UT Administrations under preferential universalization, the
applicable service charges on total farmers' share of premium including contribution
made by States/UTs shall be paid by the concerned Insurance Company only.
27.3 The bank Head Offices, CSC e-Gov & Insurance Intermediaries shall request
service charges from Insurance Companies based on approved applications for the
respective season. The Bank HQ, CSC e-Gov & Insurance Intermediaries shall
compulsorily enter the GST numbers and details of the bank accounts for remittance
of service charges on NCIP to facilitate online generation and routing of the service
charge invoice to the concerned Insurance Company and remittance of the same
electronically while creating transaction logs on NCIP for tracking and reconciliation.
27.4 No service charges will be payable to the concerned bank/branches, CSC e-Gov,
Insurance Intermediaries etc. for the applications involving anomaly or
misrepresentation of details or data and for the applications which have been
rejected by the Insurance Company as per applicable provisions of Operational
Guidelines. However, service charges on the applications undergoing area
reduction due to validation of individual applications as per the process outlined in
these guidelines shall be payable on the basis of revised and validated acreage and
corresponding farmer’s premium only.
27.5 If there is a delay in the payment of service charges by the Insurance Company
beyond 30 days of finalization of enrollment statistics, the payable service charges
shall be required to be paid with interest @12% p.a. to concerned Banks, CSC-
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
131

--- Page 132 ---
eGov, Insurance Intermediaries and other channel partners.
27.6 The services charges shall be paid by the concerned Insurance Companies to the
Banks, CSC eGov & other Insurance Intermediaries without waiting for the full
premium receipt, subject to receipt of Farmer Share and Advance Premium share
from the State Govt./UTs.
27.7 Bank HQs and Bank Branches
27.7.1 Bank and other financial institutions, including the Banking Correspondents shall be
paid service charges @ 4% of the farmer's share of premium by Insurance Company
for the farmers enrolled by the bank branches, as per the data generated from the
NCIP within the 30 days of the finalization of business statistics. The NCIP will be
equipped to auto-generate invoices on behalf of Bank HQ which will then be validated
and signed by the concerned signatory of Bank Head Office. Based on this validated
and signed invoice, the concerned insurance company shall initiate payment of
service charges as per invoice within 15 days from date of submission of the invoice
by the concerned Bank HQ. These charges include the services provided by the
banks including enrollment, data entry, subsequent clarifications, corrections of data,
reconciliation of premium debit & remittance, payment gateway charges, activities
related to awareness generation and saturation of KCC farmers etc. There shall be
Centralized payment of service charges to the banks wherein one account of the
Bank HQ only shall be mapped to NCIP. The distribution of these service charges to
the concerned branches and attached Banking Correspondents shall be the
responsibility and discretion of the Bank HQ only. If there is a delay in the payment
of service charges by the Insurance Company beyond 30 days of finalization of
business statistics, the amount needs to be paid with interest @12% p.a. to
Banks/FIs.
27.8 CSC, BCs & Other Intermediaries
27.8.1 CSC e-Gov. India Pvt. Ltd. shall be paid service charges as decided by GoI from time
to time and mutually agreed between CSC e-Gov and concerned Insurers for all
applications approved by the Insurance Company on the NCIP by the cut-off date for
doing so as per the Seasonality Discipline. This shall be subject to a capping on
commissions prescribed under IRDAI regulations. The NCIP will be equipped to auto-
generate invoice on behalf of CSC e-Gov. which will then be validated and signed by
concerned signatory of CSC e-Gov. Based on this validated and signed invoice, the
concerned insurance company shall initiate payment of service charges as per the
invoice within 15 days from date of submission of invoice by CSC e-Gov. There shall
be Centralized payment of service charges to the CSC e-Gov wherein one account
of the CSC e-Gov HQ shall be mapped to NCIP.
27.8.2 Common Service Centers, Banking Correspondents shall be paid service charges by
Insurance Companies, against the finally approved applications generated by them.
This includes charges for submission of electronic data of farmers along with
uploading of the copy of Land Possession Certificate (LPC)/Land records/ /contract
document or any other document defined by the concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations to identify sharecropper/tenant farmer, self-declaration of the intent
to sow the proposed crop or sown crop/sowing certificate as notified by the State,
Bank Passbook up to 5 pages and printout of one page of the premium
acknowledgement receipt. This shall also include re-upload/re-submission and
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
132

--- Page 133 ---
correction of data and documents if any application is reverted for
clarification/correction by the Insurance Company.
27.8.3 Rural and other insurance intermediaries engaged in providing services under the
scheme to the farmers for enrolment may be paid service charges as mutually agreed
between the Insurance Intermediaries and concerned Insurers or as per the charges
decided by the GoI from time to time for all applications approved by the Insurance
Company on the NCIP by the cut-off date for doing so as per the Seasonality
Discipline. This shall be subject to a capping on commissions prescribed under IRDAI
regulations.
28 Goods & Service Tax (GST)
28.1 Collection of premiums under the Scheme is exempted from applicability of Goods
& Service Tax (GST).
29 Monitoring and Review of the Scheme
29.1 The State Level Coordination Committee on Crop Insurance (SLCCCI) of the
concerned State shall be responsible for the monitoring of the Schemes in
respective States & UTs. However, a National Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC)
under the chairmanship of Secretary, DA&FW, GoI, shall monitor the Scheme at the
national level.
29.2 A National Review Conference shall be held twice in a year or as decided by the
Crop Insurance Division of DA&FW, GoI to review the progress with all concerned
stakeholders under the scheme to discuss the challenges, opportunities and future
strategic interventions planned under the scheme. The expenditure for the same
shall be contributed by all the implementing Insurance Companies and Re-insurance
Companies having Branches in India & underwriting PMFBY business. Detailed
SOP in this regard shall be issued with the approval of CEO-PMFBY separately from
time to time.
29.3 The following monitoring measures are proposed to ensure the effective
implementation of the Scheme during each crop season ensuring maximum benefits
to the farmers:
29.3.1 The Bank branches/CSCs/ Insurance intermediaries may collect the details of
individual insured farmers (both loanee and non-loanee) and submit the information
electronically using the web or CBS Integrated module for submission of crop wise
consolidated declarations on or before final cut-off date. Final yield data based on
CCEs shall be made available online on NCIP for the concerned Insurance
Companies by the State Governments/UT Administrations within One month from
the date of final harvest of the specific notified crop.
29.3.2 The calculation of excess insured area if any shall be reported by the Insurance
Companies immediately after the completion of coverage period and uploading of
data of individual insured farmers on the Portal but no later than the onset of CCEs.
Similarly, any anomaly in the actual yield data shall be brought to the notice of the
concerned State Government/UT Administration no later than 7 days from the final
receipt of actual yield data as detailed in Para 16.4 point 42 of Table 2 & Para 19
of these guidelines.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
133

--- Page 134 ---
29.3.3 Insurance Companies shall calculate crop-wise, IU wise payable claims on add-on
covers and final claims based on the actual yield data and threshold yield as per the
type of TY adopted at the time of tendering. Accordingly, the payable claims subject
to payment of applicable premium share by the Central and State Governments/UT
Administrations for the season shall be remitted by the Insurance Companies
directly into the beneficiary farmer's accounts electronically through NCIP using the
DigiClaim Module.
29.3.4 After the finalization of the claim amount from the concerned Insurance Companies,
the same shall be made available on the NCIP for the concerned bank branches,
CSC e-Gov and other channel partners. The bank branches and CSC VLEs shall
spread awareness and motivation amongst farming community to opt for enrollment
under the scheme.
29.3.5 The individual farmer shall be able to check and track the status of Application, Claim
and Grievance ticket on the NCIP. Further, the farmer should be able to raise
complaints, queries and grievances related to PMFBY through Krishi Rakshak Portal
& Helpline which has been designed and developed with exhaustive provisions and
mechanisms of public grievance redressal & feedback etc.,
29.3.6 The State/UTs should ensure that crop insurance products, including the weather
index-based coverage under RWBCIS, provide comprehensive insurance coverage
to the farmers on sound insurance principles and provide the best value for the
premium. State/UT Government may also review the progress of the Scheme
periodically and undertake impact assessment after the completion of each season
and send their suggestion and recommendations to the GoI for making further
course corrections in the provisions of the scheme.
29.3.7 About 5% of the beneficiaries shall be verified by Regional Offices or Local level
Offices of Insurance Companies who will send the feedback on Crop Insurance to
the concerned DLMC, State/UT Government and SLCCCI.
29.3.8 At least 10% of the beneficiaries verified by the Insurance Companies may be cross
verified by the concerned DLMC and they should send the feedback to the State/UT
Government.
29.3.9 1% to 2% of the beneficiaries may be verified and validated by the Head Office of
the Insurance Companies or the Independent Agencies appointed by the GoI or
NLMC and they should send the necessary feedback to the GoI.
30 Grievance Redressal Mechanism
30.1 Each implementing State/UT and empaneled Insurance Companies are required to
compulsorily collaborate for setting up a robust grievance redressal mechanism with
requisite infrastructure up to the level of Block/Taluka to address grievances of all
stakeholders particularly insured farmers.
30.2 At the initial level, for grievance redressal, each district shall designate a Taluka and
District level grievance redressal officer preferably Tehsil/Taluk or District
Agriculture/Horticulture Officer to record & respond to the grievances of Farmers,
Banks, & Insurance Companies etc. In case of receipt of any grievance, the
Tehsil/Taluk level grievance redressal Officer shall take suitable action as per the
provisions of these guidelines within 7 days from the receipt of grievance. In case of
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
134

--- Page 135 ---
dissatisfaction, the matter may be brought before the Appellate Committee (AC)
constituted viz. District Level Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC).
30.3 Appellate Committee (AC)/DGRC at District Level: In line with the DLMC, an
Appellate Committee (AC)/DGRC shall also be constituted for redressal of
grievances of Farmers, Banks, Insurance Company, CSC-VLE, Insurance
Intermediaries, District Authority/Department. This Committee will be headed by the
District Magistrate (DM*)/Collector and the representatives of Farmers, Lead District
Manager (LDM/Banks, District Development Manager (DDM) NABARD, Insurance
Company and concerned District Authority/Department (i.e,
Agriculture/Horticulture/Cooperative/Revenue/ Agricultural Statistics etc.) shall be
appointed as members. This Committee may also invite subject specialists/experts
from Universities/IMD/commodity Boards/Research Institutions, SRSAC etc., if
deemed necessary. If the AC is satisfied that there is an error of judgement by the
by the grievance redressal officer at the Tehsil / Taluk level then it may admit the
appeal filed before it. The AC shall record the averments of the appellant as well as
all the connected parties, examine the issues raised in the light of the operational
guidelines and dispose the matter within 15 days by passing a speaking order and
the grievance shall be treated as closed. However, in case if the AC is of the view
that the appeal is not admissible, it shall reject the same in writing by recording the
reasons thereof.
30.4 State Level Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC): The State/UT shall also
constitute a State Level Grievance Redressal Committee for redressal of grievance
of Farmers, Banks, Insurance Company, CSC-VLE, CSC eGov, Insurance
Intermediaries, District Authority/Department unsettled at the level of the DGRC.
This Committee will be headed by the Principal Secretary/Secretary of the Nodal
Department, SLBC/Banks, Chief General Manager (CGM) NABARD, Insurance
Company and the concerned State Authority/Department shall be appointed as
members. This Committee may also invite subject specialists/ experts from
Agriculture University/ IMD/ research institutions/commodity Boards/, State Remote
Sensing Application Centre, SRSAC, STSU, STAC, concerned MITRs etc., if
deemed necessary.
30.5 The grievances which have wider scope of effect impacting a greater number of
districts or there is a breach of guidelines by any of the stakeholder or the grievance
matter exceeds Rs. 25 Lakh in monetary terms, such matters may be directly raised
at the level of the State Level Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC). The
Committee will dispose of the grievance within 15 days from the time of receipt of
grievance. The decision of the Committee shall be accepted by all the parties. The
States/UTs shall notify the constitution of such a grievance redressal committee and
make wide publicity amongst farmers along with the name, address, email ID and
contact number of grievance redressal officer. State/UTs may also nominate the
State level Grievance Redressal Officers at the rank of Director to register and
dispose of grievances not in the purview of District Level Grievance Redressal
Committee (DGRC) In addition, the State/UTs shall strictly comply and take the
responsibility of the following activities:
A. Strengthening of the different levels of Grievance Redressal Committee (GRCs) and
the Appellate Committees for resolving the grievances at the ground level (Taluka /
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
135

--- Page 136 ---
District level).
B. Required capacity building shall be provided to the officials concerned with
Grievance Redressal and its timely resolution and disposal.
C. Systematic functioning of such Committees at various levels with proper reporting
mechanism and documentation.
D. Timely disposal of the Grievances and intimation of the status of disposal to the
complainant with proper tracking mechanism.
E. Avoiding procedural delays in channelizing the Grievances to officials and
organizations for taking necessary action and strict adherence to the timelines
defined in these Guidelines.
F. Proper documentation of the Grievances and Disposal status shall be ensured for
further tracking by the State/UTs and the GoI and for disposal of complaints or
queries raised by farmers, public representatives etc., through RTIs or by any such
Government provided Citizen rights mechanism for ensuring greater transparency
and accountability of the stakeholders within the Scheme.
G. The status of the grievance receipts and disposal shall be regularly updated by
concerned Insurance Companies, Banks, State/UTs or the GoI on respective
platforms e.g. CPGRMS, KRPH and on social media handles of PMFBY maintained
by the GoI and the respective State/ UTs.
30.6 Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline (KRPH)
30.6.1 A dedicated Centralized Toll-free Number, under the aegis of Krishi Rakshak Portal
& Helpline (KRPH) has been set-up for query resolution and grievance redressal of
farmers. Any query or complaint of the farmer will be registered on the NCIP against
a unique ticket number. The ticket number will be shared with the farmer through
SMS or Chatbot indicating the tentative resolution timeline. Simple queries or
complaints shall be resolved by the concerned agent handling the call whereas the
serious complaints and grievances which the agents are not able to resolve shall be
further forwarded to the concerned Stakeholder viz. Insurance Company, Banks,
CSC e-Gov or nodal departments of the States/UTs. The concerned Stakeholder
shall provide the resolution electronically within given timelines defined by GoI. The
solution or redressal shall be intimated to the farmer through a feedback telephonic
call and also through NCIP, Chatbot & Mobile App basis the information given by
the concerned stakeholder on NCIP and/or KRPH.
30.6.2 The Krishi Rakshak Portal shall be the centralized system equipped with the
necessary features viz., Complaint/Query capturing through multiple modes
(electronic, telephonic and conventional or physical mode), farmer authentication &
online ticket creation and forwarding to the concerned stakeholders, online
escalation as per escalation matrix, updating of resolution details, MIS &
Dashboards for data analysis and visualization.
30.6.3 The farmers’ grievances would be registered and transmitted to the concerned
Insurance Company, banks, CSC e-Gov, State, Districts or Bank users etc., for
resolution within a definite turn-around-time. At each stakeholder, the query or
grievance shall have multiple escalation levels from lowest to highest and shall have
maximum 15 days to dispose the same. Any appeal against the decision of the
stakeholder shall be at the lowest defined level of the stratified grievance redressal
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
136

--- Page 137 ---
structure created by the State/UT Government. The State/UT Government shall
have access to the entire process and this portal shall act as a platform for the
State/UTs for grievance redressal and their monitoring. There will be landlord-tenant
framework where the platform shall be provided by the GoI and the State
Governments/UT Administrations will be completely responsible for day to day
functioning of effective grievance redressal mechanism for their own State/UT. GoI
shall only act as the facilitator and the responsibility of redressal and closure of
grievances shall vest with the Insurance Companies, Banks, CSC e-Gov and the
State Governments/UT Administrations.
30.6.4 The system shall not only take the grievances/queries through calls but will also
facilitate those grievances from the farmers which are received through other
sources like mobile app, Chatbot, social media, email, handwritten applications,
walk-in grievances lodged by the farmers at local State, District or Taluka Agriculture
Office or Insurance Company.
30.6.5 Every grievance shall be taken to a logical conclusion to the satisfaction of the
farmer. Every grievance will have a Ticket ID with ticket closure responsibility lying
with the Insurance Company, State/UT and Bank respectively as per the type of
grievance. The turnaround time for the grievances and queries on the grievance
portal shall be 15 days. Grievances which are tagged to State/UT officials will be
dealt with exclusively by the State/UT.
30.6.6 IRDAI already has an Integrated Grievance Management System named as Bima
Bharosa, a platform for complaint registration and grievance redressal, which shall
also be integrated with KRPH for real-time information sharing and escalation of
grievances which stands unresolved with the Insurance Company within the given
period of 15 days. Further, similar integrations shall also be done with respective
grievance redressal portals of RBI, States/UTs specific grievance redressal portals
and Central Govt. portal i.e. CPGRMS etc. comprehensive visibility and quick
resolution of all types of grievances and complaints related to multiple stakeholders
under PMFBY.
30.6.7 Any grievance resolved by the respective stakeholders shall be liable for re-opening
in case the concerned farmer is not satisfied with the resolution.
30.7 Grievance Redressal Mechanism by Insurance Company
30.7.1 Each implementing Insurance Company will put in place an effective and resilient
Grievance Redressal Mechanism for resolution and disposal of all grievances
received through multiple channels viz. Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline, their own
Toll-Free Call Centres, Social Media, Tehsil Level Grievance Cell, DGRC, SGRC,
IRDAI, Insurance Ombudsmen, Banks, SLBC, Centralized Public Grievance
Redressal and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS), respective State Grievance
Redressal and Monitoring System (GRAMS) and similar entities and directly through
farmer in the form of application/complaint letter. A designated resource/manpower
at each tehsil level shall be equipped to handle and resolve grievances of farmers
at local level and he/she should be able to participate in Tehsil/Taluk level grievance
meetings and dispose-off the grievances.
30.7.2 Similarly, senior resource persons at the District and State level should be equipped
to participate in DGRC and SGRC meeting to resolve such grievances.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
137

--- Page 138 ---
30.7.3 Insurance Company shall ensure that details of the grievance redressal officers
along with the name, address and contact number and email id is publicized widely
among farmers. Insurance Companies will have to dispose the grievance within 15
days’ time of receipt of each and every grievance/complaint.
30.7.4 Insurance Company shall have to mandatorily prepare and submit monthly report
containing details of all such grievances reported and their disposal status to
respective Grievance Redressal Committees in the 1st week of next month.
30.7.5 All the queries, complaints or grievances related to the scheme shall mandatorily be
ported and handled through Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline.
30.8 Committee to Examine the Additional Claims Arising due to Errors,
Omissions and Commissions of the financial Institutions
30.8.1 A committee has been be constituted under the chairpersonship of CEO-
PMFBY/Joint Secretary (Credit), DA&FW with the representatives of Internal
Finance Division (IFD), DA&FW, concerned State/UT Government, Insurance
Companies to examine and dispose the issues related to additional claims arising
due to errors or omissions and commissions of the Bank branches, CSC-VLEs,
Insurance Intermediaries etc., which are beyond the available provisions of the
Operational Guidelines and remains un-disposed and un-resolved despite having
undergone though various grievance redressal committees at District/State Level to
facilitate the redressal of disputes and grievances.
30.8.2 The Committee may also invite the senior executive/officers of concerned
stakeholders to present their cases before the committee.
30.8.3 The Committee will take final decision in this regard including recommendation for
the payment of admissible government subsidy to facilitate the payment of
admissible claims and/ or payment of such additional and full liabilities towards
admissible claims by concerned financial institution or concerned Insurance
Company.
30.8.4 The committees constituted at Tehsil/District or State level under PMFBY for
redressal of various disputes and grievances of the stakeholders should examine
and dispose of grievances including the grievances and issues pertaining to old
seasons as per the provisions of the Operational Guidelines applicable during the
respective seasons. Any clarification / interpretation of the provisions of these
Guidelines solely lies with the GoI.
31 Empanelment and Selection of Insurance Companies (ICs)
31.1 Empanelment Criteria
31.1.1 All the General Insurance Companies including specialized Insurance Companies
as empaneled by DA&FW, GoI and selected by concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations through a tendering process, shall implement PMFBY. Once an
Insurance Company has been empaneled by DA&FW, it is considered as pre-
qualified Company to bid for selection as Implementing Agency (IA) through tenders
published by the State/UTs and to undertake implementation of the
Scheme/Program in accordance with the advisories, directions and Operational
Guidelines issued by DA&FW, GoI from time to time.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
138

--- Page 139 ---
31.1.2 Insurance Companies shall not be permitted to surrender full or partial clusters or
districts once the company has been selected as L1 bidder. If any Insurance
Company declines after being declared L1, it will be de-empaneled/ de-barred to
implement crop insurance Scheme for the coming/next season(s) in the concerned
or all the State/UTs and L2 may be given the cluster for implementing the crop
insurance scheme at L1 district-crop combination rates. If L2 bidder also declines to
implement the scheme with prescribed conditions, other bidders’ viz. L3, L4 and so
on, shall be asked for their consent. All Such bidders will be required to
simultaneously furnish appropriate reasons for withdrawal, surrender or non-
acceptance in writing to the State/UT Government with the copy to the DA&FW, GoI,
to enable further corrective measures and appropriate administrative & legal action
accordingly. Financial losses, if any, to the State/UT Government, in re-tendering
due to withdrawal of selected bidder, will be recovered from the withdrawing L1
bidder.
31.1.3 Each Insurance Company should compulsorily bid for any NER or Himalayan States
and UTs. Suitable penalty may be imposed to the non-participating insurers by the
D&FW, GoI.
31.1.4 Core businesses such as underwriting, grievance redressal, claim calculation and
settlement cannot be outsourced by the Insurance Company to any third party
outside of the organization. Suitable financial penalty shall be imposed on the
defaulters by DA&FW, GoI and will also send recommendations to IRDAI and other
regulators for taking necessary action in the matter.
31.1.5 Since premium rate is being decided on the basis of transparent bidding process,
the co-insurance arrangements between the insurers as per the standard practices
of the insurance industry within the provision of IRDAI regulations and guidelines
shall be allowed under PMFBY in order to expand the insurance retention capacity
within the country and support smaller insurers to gain experience and increase their
capacities. All companies however have to inform such arrangements if any in
advance to the DA&FW, GoI.
31.2 Selection Criteria of Empaneled Insurance Companies as Implementing
Agency (IA)
31.2.1 The selection of Insurance Company from the empaneled list, as communicated by
DA&FW, GoI from time to time, to act as Implementing Agency (IA) shall be done by
the concerned States/UTs for implementing the Scheme in their State/UT. Selection
of IA will be made by adopting the cluster approach by clubbing multiple districts into
clusters comprising of 3-6 districts each. In the case of smaller States, the whole
State/UT may be assigned to one IA.
31.2.2 Before the commencement of the crop season, the State/UT Government would
invite the pre-qualified empaneled Insurance Companies through open tender
for submission of district-wise and crop-wise cluster level actuarial premium
rates as percentage of Sum Insured (financial bid). Indemnity Level, Threshold
Yields, Sum Insured etc. along with all other data and conditions will be the same
for all the Insurance Companies for the season. The participating empaneled
companies have to bid the premium rates for all the crops notified / to be notified in
the cluster by the State Governments/UT Administration. Non-compliance will lead
to rejection of the bid.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
139

--- Page 140 ---
31.2.3 Based on the district-wise and crop-wise actuarial premium rates quoted by the
empaneled companies, the total premium amount and weighted average premium
rates for cluster of districts will be calculated to arrive at lowest bid rate (L1). The L1
Bidder at cluster level will be selected to act as the Implementing Agency in the
concerned cluster.
31.2.4 State/UTs shall be required to select Insurance Companies for minimum period of
three years. Ensuring long-term continuity will facilitate the Insurance Companies to
build their credibility amongst the farmers by investing in manpower and
infrastructure creation and also committing part of its profit towards Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) initiatives through various activities aiming at the welfare and
socio-economic development of the farmers viz. creation of the facilities of drinking
water, healthcare, education, farm levelling, weather forecasts & advisory services,
technology testing and transfer, etc. It is also anticipated that long term continuity
gives an opportunity to Insurers, Bankers, State Governments/UT Administrations
and other stakeholders to achieve a supportive and collaborative approach to ensure
close working relationship and efficiency in service delivery.
31.2.5 The insurance coverage in terms of the number of farmers and acreage should be
at least at the level of the corresponding previous season. In case of fall in coverage,
DA&FW, GoI may get the facts examined and the reduction in coverage may impact
the ranking of the Insurance Companies and the State/UT Government and also
warrant corrective action including penal action by the DA&FW, GoI.
31.2.6 The State/UT Government may provide the requisite data about past yield of the last
10 consecutive years or more, threshold yield, crop-wise sum insured, indemnity
level, insurance unit levels, names of notified units, calamity years etc. in a digital
form by uploading the same on NCIP before floating the formal tender notice. This
will enable in ensuring a single source of data throughout the years and instill
confidence and objectivity in the datasets being used for assessment of underlying
risk and pricing by the Insurance and re-insurance companies.
32 Clustering/Clubbing of Districts for Bidding by the State/UT
32.1 In order to diversify and spread the risk and cover high risk and low risk districts area
without any prejudice, the State Governments/UT Administrations are required to
group the districts/ area in such a way that each group contains a mix of districts/
area with different risk profiles. Prior to inviting the bid, the Stat/UTs Government,
especially the large States have to divide the State into multiple clusters of districts
depending on the volume of risk associated in the crops and district/areas proposed
to be notified under the Scheme. The purpose of clustering is to divide the States
into different groups of districts, so that expected sum insured (ESI) becomes
relatively low and risk is shared and diversified. The States may form the clusters of
districts based on the following approaches:
i. Districts of high risk and low risk areas,
ii. Districts of different agro-climatic zones, and
iii. ESI of each cluster should be preferably of similar size and order.
32.2 The district having a very high risks exposure, i.e., the total Sum Insured (SI) value
may also be divided and distributed across clusters, combining sub-districts as a
new cluster or clubbing with clusters comprising of other districts. However, while
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
140

--- Page 141 ---
dividing the District in more than one clusters, administrative convenience may also
be considered. Prior to the bid invitation, details on the cluster formation shall also
be made available to the insurance companies compulsorily.
32.3 The Clustering/ Clubbing of districts should be done to achieve the following
objectives:
A. Cluster formation shall be applicable for up to 3 years and shall not be changed
during the contract period. Different clusters may be defined based on the risk profile
of the district so as to increase the diversification of risk within a cluster and enable
risk spreading for insurer.
B. Cluster may contain districts with mixed agro-climatic zones so as to increase the
diversification of a risk within a cluster.
C. Crop-wise associated risk may also be diversified among the clusters and shall be
factored in cluster formation.
32.4 Hence, one of the major requirements of clustering is the risk analysis of different
districts. For the purpose of clustering and clubbing of districts and determination of
L1 bidder, the risk is analyzed based on the long-term data of yield by:
a) Computing the average burn cost (percent difference between actual yield and
threshold yield) and
b) Computing the level of variability in the long-term yield.
32.5 Although high quality long-term yield data is available at IU level since 2016
onwards, but the same is not always reflective of the crop losses especially when
the claims on localized risks exceed the yield loss across few states or districts or
crops therefore separate assessment of such trends along with the yield variations
should be taken into account for underlying risk analysis. Other methods (including
the use of satellite data) should also be explored for accurate risk assessment.
32.6 Satellite data, of moderate resolution (e.g. Resource-sat, Advanced Wide Field
Sensor (AWiFS), Terra/Aqua MODIS) are available, for the long-term, i.e. at least
around 15 years. The long-term Vegetation Indices, which are indicators of crop
health, derived from these satellites can be used to assess the year-to-year
variations and thereby understanding the risk potential of an area. It can be
combined with many other satellite derived products, such as flood maps, drought
assessments and vulnerability and long-term weather data to carry out the risk
analysis. State/UTs are advised to take the support of concerned National or State
level research organizations (e.g. ISRO- NRSC/SAC, MNCFC, SRSACs, SAUs,
etc.), to use the above-mentioned technology for carrying out risk analysis of the
Districts/ Talukas/ Blocks towards improvement in clustering. Alternatively, the
matter may also be referred to the CPMU established under DA&FW, GoI for the
requisite analysis and feedback.
32.7 The above-listed approaches are only to provide guidance to the State/UTs. The
State Governments/UT Administrations are free to follow the recommended
approaches, or any other method devised by them however, ensuring that the
DA&FW is suitably informed.
32.8 The detail illustration for classification of risks, clubbing/clustering of risks and
districts and determination of L1 bidder are at Annexure-III.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
141

--- Page 142 ---
33 Assessment of Performance and De-empanelment of Insurance
Companies
33.1 The performance of the empaneled Insurance Companies shall be closely monitored
by the concerned Nodal Department of the State Governments/UT Administrations
at the end of the completion of each 1 year interval comprising of at least two crop
seasons i.e. Kharif and Rabi through ascertaining the company's skills, commitment
and efficiencies for providing cost effective and efficient insurance services to
farmers.
33.2 For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key
performance indicators with assigned weightage shall be notified by DA&FW from
time to time and circulated to the stakeholders.
33.3 The Nodal department at the end of two complete seasons of a year may initiate
performance evaluation of the Insurance Companies working in their state on the
specific parameters as prescribed in the Insurance Company's Performance
Evaluation Matrix as notified by DA&FW, GoI from time to time and complete the
activity as per timelines defined in the Seasonal Discipline.
33.4 The base data to be used for the evaluation shall be extracted from NCIP by DA&FW
and analyzed as per the performance evaluation matrix. The Nodal department of
the states/UTs shall be required to submit Insurance Company wise assessment
separately as per the template prepared by the DA&FW for the purpose. The
state/UT will share their evaluation report with respective Insurance Companies for
their comments and confirmation. Each Insurance Company should be given
enough opportunity to present their views and substantiate their observations with
valid data and proofs. Nodal Department shall evaluate such additional data and
/proofs submitted by the Insurance Company and accordingly review their evaluation
report and submit to DA&FW, GoI within given timelines.
33.5 DA&FW, GoI will have the final authority to implement and execute the performance
evaluation report after thorough evaluation and validation of facts. DA&FW, GoI may
ask for additional data and proofs from the Insurance Company or Nodal Department
of the State/UT Government to substantiate the facts as stated in the report.
33.6 Once the Performance Evaluation report has been accepted and finalized by
DA&FW, GoI, and the corresponding reward and punitive actions will be taken by
the Ministry along with similar actions by the Nodal Department of the State/UT.
34 Evaluation of Efficiency of Nodal Departments of the State/UT
34.1 The efficiency evaluation of the State Nodal Department shall also be closely
monitored by DA&FW on every 1-year interval through ascertaining the State's
efficiency and execution / implementation of the Scheme.
34.2 For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key
performance indicators with assigned weightage shall be notified by DA&FW from
time to time and circulated to the stakeholders.
35 Evaluation of Efficiency of Districts
35.1 The efficiency evaluation of the Districts shall also be closely monitored by DA&FW
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
142

--- Page 143 ---
on every 1-year interval through ascertaining the District’s efficiency in execution &
implementation of the Scheme.
35.2 For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key
performance indicators with assigned weightage shall be notified by DA&FW from
time to time and circulated to the stakeholders.
35.3 Once the Performance Evaluation report has been accepted and finalized by
DA&FW, GoI, the corresponding reward and punitive actions will be taken by the
GoI along with similar actions by the Nodal Department of the state.
36 Evaluation of Efficiency of Banks
36.1 The efficiency and evaluation of the performance of the Financial Institutions shall
be carried out by DA&FW on every 1-year interval as per the Performance evaluation
matrix and ranking framework for these institutions.
36.2 For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key
performance indicators with assigned weightage shall be notified by DA&FW from
time to time and circulated to the stakeholders.
37 Evaluation of Efficiency of CSC-VLEs
37.1 The efficiency and evaluation of the performance of CSC-SPV shall be carried out
by DA&FW on every 1-year interval as per the Performance evaluation matrix and
ranking framework for CSC-VLEs.
37.2 For the purpose, a detailed performance evaluation matrix containing key
performance indicators with assigned weightage shall be notified by DA&FW from
time to time and circulated to the stakeholders.
38 Role and Responsibilities of Various Agencies
For successful implementation and administration of Scheme, roles of various
Agencies, Institutions, Government Departments & Committees are spelt out herein.
38.1 Government of India (GoI)
38.1.1 Support and Coordination with the State Governments/UT Administrations for
implementation of PMFBY including awareness creation, publicity and the issuance
of necessary instructions and Operational Guidelines from time to time for smooth
and effective implementation.
38.1.2 Issue of directives to RBI, NABARD, Commercial Banks, RRBs and Cooperatives
for compliance with the terms and conditions of PMFBY and its operational
modalities.
38.1.3 Design, development, operationalization and maintenance of National Crop
Insurance Portal (NCIP), WINDS Portal, KRPH Portal, YES-TECH Portal, LMS
Portal, etc. and various mobile applications including AIDE App, Crop Insurance
App, CCE Agri App, CROPIC App, Crop Loss Assessment App and other such
applications & tools.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
143

--- Page 144 ---
38.1.4 Setting up of the Central Program Management Unit (CPMU) with adequate
infrastructure and expertise as defined in Para 15.
38.1.5 Constitution of Technical Advisory Committee and operationalization of central TAC
as defined in Para 19.3 to take up matters/disputes referred to it by any of the
stakeholders for resolution and redressal.
38.1.6 Facilitate States in strengthening of AWS/ARG network under WINDS by providing
financial support as outlined in Para 7.6.10
38.1.7 To release central share of premium subsidy as outlined in Para 6.1.6 & 6.1.7 and
to release claim liabilities under Cup & Cap (60-130) & Profit & Loss Sharing Models
under ARTM as outlined in Para 5.7 of these guidelines.
38.1.8 To release balance tranches of premium subsidy for the season to the concerned
Insurance Companies as per the enrollment statistics on NCIP.
38.1.9 To review and monitor the implementation of PMFBY including premium rates,
product-benchmarking and other matters and issue necessary directives to
Insurance Companies, Banks, CSC e-Gov, Insurance Intermediaries, Technical
Partners (MITRs, TIPs, WIPs) and other channel partners. Review the performance
of participating stakeholders and suggest modifications/ improvements wherever
required.
38.1.10 To organize Capacity building trainings and workshops for the State
Governments/UT Administrations, Banks, CSC-eGIv/VLEs, Insurance
Intermediaries, Technical Partners ((MITRs, TIPs, WIPs)) and Insurance
Companies, to interpret the provisions of the Scheme and take decision on matters
of risk or dispute in implementation of the scheme and settlement of claims.
38.1.11 To provide necessary assistance, guidance and resources for adoption of new
technology for ensuring transparency, objectivity, better administration of Scheme
and timely payment of claims to insured farmers.
38.1.12 To utilize 0.25% of the total Gross Premium (out of 0.5% of the total Gross Premium
earmarked for awareness, publicity & capacity building) pooled at the central level
to ensure sustainable and scalable awareness, publicity and capacity building
interventions and build a knowledge repository.
38.1.13 To develop Technology related protocols including the protocols for Smart Sampling
Techniques and Technology Based yield estimation for claim assessment and
disbursement.
38.1.14 Empanelment of Insurance Companies, constitutions of various committees
including YES-TECH, WINDS, Central TAC, SARTHI (Sandbox for Agricultural &
Rural Security, Technology & Insurance) Committee and Quality Assurance
Partners (QAPs) for QC & QA assessment of WIPs under WINDS, empanelment of
Loss Assessment Agencies and accreditation of Loss Assessors, empanelment of
technical partners viz. MITR, TIPs and WIPs under YESTECH & WINDS.
38.1.15 Fostering experimentation and innovation for the creation of new Agri-insurance
products under Agri-Sandbox framework for quicker adoption of technological
developments and enhanced risk protection to rural and agricultural economies so
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
144

--- Page 145 ---
that access to affordable insurance increases and development of region / State
specific products is encouraged.
38.1.16 Interpretation of any provision of the Scheme, decision in any aspects of the
acceptance of risk or any dispute in settlement of claims between the stakeholders,
and facilitation of stakeholders though technology interventions for effective
implementation of the scheme.
38.1.17 To issue clarifications for the interpretation of these guidelines. The advisories,
directions or clarifications issued by DA&FW, GoI shall also be considered as a part
of these guidelines.
38.1.18 To amend & issue Operational Guidelines of PMFBY, amendments of manual of
YESTECH, WINDS, CROPIC, KRPH, LMS, guidelines of FIAT and SOP/Manuals of
various other interventions under PMFBY from time to time.
38.2 State Government/UT Administration
38.2.1 To constitute the SLCCCI with adequate representation of all stakeholders as
detailed in Para 6.1.9. The composition of SLCCCI may be strengthened suitably
from time to time to give representation to all the concerned participants including
farmers in the implementation of the Scheme.
38.2.2 To set up and notify State level Technical Advisory Committee (STAC) and State
level Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC) at State/UT level in order to take up
matters/disputes referred to it by any of the stakeholders for resolution and
redressal.
38.2.3 To set up and notify the District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMC), District Level
Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC), District Level Joint Committee (DJLC) for
crop damage assessment and District Level Steering committee for conducting
CCEs and to hold regular meeting and ensure frequency of meetings at the district
level.
38.2.4 To hold SLCCCI meeting well in advance to finalize clusters, issue bid document &
notice, selection of Implementing Agency and issuance of Notification. Notification
of the State/UT Government shall contain all information as per model tender
document outlined in Para 7 of these guidelines.
38.2.5 To publish bid document for selection of TIPs and WIPs for implementation of YES-
TECH and WINDS under the scheme as per respective manuals issued by GoI from
time to time.
38.2.6 To take suitable action for adoption of new technology solutions including YES-
TECH, CROPIC, WINDS Smart Sampling Technique (SST), etc., for early loss
assessment and better administration of Scheme.
38.2.7 To issue necessary directives to all agencies, institutions, Government departments
and Committees involved in implementation of Scheme.
38.2.8 Notify insurance unit area at Village or Village Panchayat or other equivalent units
for major crops. Unit size may be above the level of Village or Village Panchayat for
other crops as per the availability and actual cultivation of the crops.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
145

--- Page 146 ---
38.2.9 To furnish in advance insurance unit-wise (or of higher unit, if unit level data not
available) yield data of past 10 years of all crops notified under PMFBY, previous 10
years season-wise, crop-wise & IU-wise loss cost data, past 5 years season-wise,
crop-wise, IU-wise coverage and claim data and other relevant data as per Para 8
of these Guidelines on NCIP as per the templates detailed in model tender document
issued by DA&FW, GoI.
38.2.10 Issuance of necessary instructions to the WIPs implementing WINDS and the
Regional Meteorological Centers of IMD for maintenance and supply of weather data
as per standards and specifications outlined in WINDS Manual 2023.
38.2.11 Plan and conduct awareness and publicity three months prior to the start of the
coverage period, to maximize coverage of the farmers especially non-loanee
farmers in co-ordination with implementing Insurance Companies, Banks & CSC-
VLEs.
38.2.12 To release state share of premium subsidy as outlined in Para 6.1.6 & 6.1.7 and to
release claim liabilities under Cup & Cap (80-110, 60-130) & Profit & Loss Sharing
Models under ARTM as outlined in Para 5.7 of these guidelines.
38.2.13 To release balance tranches of premium subsidy for the season to the concerned
insurance companies as per the enrollment statistics on NCIP.
38.2.14 Submission of yield data for all notified crops and insurance units to the insurance
companies in a standard template in an electronic form on the NCIP within the
stipulated timelines.
38.2.15 Assist the insurance companies for assessment of crop loss of the individual insured
farmers caused by localized perils and also assist in assessment of the post-harvest
losses. Also to notify preventive sowing/germination failure and Mid-Season
Calamity and assess the crop damage along with Insurance Companies.
38.2.16 To conduct requisite number of CCEs using CCE Agri App of GoI in the notified area
as per the GCES/State manual. Provide the yield data to the Insurance Company
within the prescribed cut-off date, along with results of the individual CCEs.
38.2.17 To approve Actual Yield (AY) & Threshold Yield (TY) data under PMFBY on NCIP
and approve loss cost under RWBCIS in order to enable Insurance Companies to
accept the AY & TY data & loss cost under PMFBY & RWBCIS respectively and
initiate the claims.
38.2.18 To provide relevant documents to the Insurance companies for those CCEs co-
observed by them. It is only in cases of CCEs co-observed by Insurance Companies
that they can raise objections in case of any discrepancy or contradiction in yield
data. States/UTs shall also resolve the objections raised by the Insurance
companies on any yield data.
38.2.19 To notify district-wise and crop-wise seasonality discipline including onset of sowing
dates and cut-off date for completion of harvesting.
38.2.20 To provide crop-wise, IU-wise data of normal area sown and notify cut-off dates for
invoking provisions of prevented/failed sowing/transplantation/germination clause.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
146

--- Page 147 ---
38.2.21 Approval of CCE data on NCIP and uploading of missing CCE data to facilitate
calculation of claims on portal.
38.2.22 Ensure mandatory use of Mobile Application and other technology solutions like RST
for improvement in the quality of CCEs and digitization of CCE-wise yield on NCIP.
38.2.23 Setting up of the State PMU with adequate infrastructure and domain expertise.
38.2.24 To provide office space to implementing Insurance Companies at its
District/Tehsil/Block office. The States/UT may charge suitable payment for such
accommodation offered to Insurance Company as per government rates.
38.2.25 To undertake performance evaluation of implementing Insurance Companies and
calculate financial penalty as per Operational Guidelines.
38.2.26 Timely and correct preparation, updation and digitization of Village level master
(Location master) on the NCIP.
38.2.27 Ensure no condition is enforced in violation of the provisions mentioned in the
Operational Guidelines while publishing the tender or selection of bidders and
implementation of scheme.
38.3 Central PMUs and State PMUs
38.3.1 Monitoring of the implementation of Crop Insurance Schemes at national and
State/UT level.
38.3.2 Calculation of Scheme-wise/season-wise/crop-wise Loss Cost, evaluation of bids
received and providing actuarial analysis to the GoI and State Governments/UT
Administrations.
38.3.3 Design & development parametric products and multi-peril hybrid products for the
crop / areas based on the local weather conditions and underlying risks.
38.3.4 Appraisal/ benchmarking and standardization of crop insurance products (weather
based) for various participating Insurance Companies.
38.3.5 Undertake the evaluation, impact & correlation studies for various activities being
performed and executed under the scheme.
38.3.6 To undertake awareness, capacity building and training of all the stakeholders
engaged in crop insurance.
38.3.7 To provide technical input to Government & Insurance Companies regarding crop
insurance products.
38.3.8 To develop methodology for crop loss assessment & yield estimation including
assessment through remote sensing, suggest improvements in the method for yield
assessment through CCEs & other alternatives etc.
38.3.9 Development of integrated database for crop insurance, data analytics of data as
available on NCIP for monitoring and other strategic interventions by the GoI and
the State Governments/UT Administrations.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
147

--- Page 148 ---
38.3.10 Development of effective and objective Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) Framework
& Management Information System (MIS).
38.3.11 To undertake other related works/activities entrusted by the DA&FW, GoI and the
work/activities referred by the State Governments/UT Administrations to GoI for
technical assessment and feedback.
38.4 Insurance Companies (ICs)
38.4.1 To liaise with State Governments/UT Administrations and Agencies/ Institutions &
Committees involved in the implementation of PMFBY and regular participation in
meetings conducted.
38.4.2 To undertake risk underwriting-responsibilities, claim settlement & grievance
redressal for acceptance of risk and processing claim liabilities strictly as an in-
house activity. It should not be outsourced to external/third party.
38.4.3 To process claims on receipt of crop damage & yield data from States/UTs and
remittance of claims directly into farmers’ bank account through NCIP using the
DigiClaim module of NCIP within the prescribed timelines.
38.4.4 Obtain re-insurance arrangements, if necessary for diversifying the underlying risk
with rated re-insurers as per the regulatory provisions on the same.
38.4.5 To verify the land records and other details of farmers immediately after the cut-off
date for data uploading is over but before the onset of crop harvesting and arrival of
actual yield data. No validation or holding back the claim shall be done after the
approval of yield data and calculation of claims.
38.4.6 Share the details of the designated insurance intermediaries with the State/UTs
before the inception of non-loanee farmers’ enrolment for the season to the
concerned authority. Also share the list of Crop Loss Survey Agencies and Loss
surveyors with the States/UTs before the onset of crop damage assessment
surveys.
38.4.7 Ensure timely payment of commission/ service charges to Banks, CSC e-Gov, BCs
& Insurance Intermediaries for implementation of the Scheme.
38.4.8 To undertake extensive efforts to create awareness, education and generate
publicity about the scheme at the grass-root level including for bank branches, VLEs,
BCs, State & District level officials and staff and especially for the farmers. Also
coordinate with the States and other agencies for awareness and publicity of the
Scheme. Refer to the IEC and Training activities detailed in Para 26 of the
guidelines.
38.4.9 Provide requisite reports, statistics and information demanded by the GoI and the
State Governments/UT Administrations.
38.4.10 Handhold Bank branches, VLEs and Insurance Intermediaries and facilitate their
training and capacity building especially in terms of timely digitizing details of the
insured farmers on the NCIP.
38.4.11 Ensure insurance intermediaries and other channel partners use AIDE App for
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
148

--- Page 149 ---
farmers’ enrollment to make the entire process paperless and cashless and enable
enrollment of farmers at their doorsteps.
38.4.12 Redressal of all queries, complaints and grievances within the time frame fixed by
DA&FW, GoI under the KRPH framework and integration of the Grievance
Redressal system of Insurance Companies with the KRPH for resolution.
Maintenance of the record of grievances received from different sources and its
disposal.
38.4.13 The coverage of eligible loanee farmers should be carried out by Insurance
Companies through the bank branches, Coverage of non-loanee farmers or the
farmers not willing to enroll through bank branches may be done though insurance
intermediaries.
38.4.14 To establish a functional office at the sub-district level i.e. Tehsil/Block level in each
District and at least one personnel to be deployed at each Tehsil/Block level office
in the allocated Districts. The district office will be headed by a full-time on-roll
employee of the Insurance Company preferably an Agri Graduate. The Insurance
Companies may also seek separate space from the State/District administration to
set-up their functional office in their Tehsil/Block level and District level departmental
offices for ease of farmer’s access and close monitoring. These functional offices
shall be operational though out the concerned season and thereafter until the full
closure of the activities, operational matters and complete settlement of claims of
the concerned season. Details of the offices at the district and sub-district level
including names and contact number of the resources employed should be
compulsorily uploaded on the NCIP before the start of enrollment.
38.4.15 To deploy sufficient manpower to co-observe CCEs and allied activities. Ensure
compulsory co-observance through CCE-Agri App.
38.4.16 At the beginning of each crop season, concerned Insurance Companies need to
prepare a stakeholder-wise micro level IEC and training activity plan and ensure
strict implementation of the same and undertake IEC activities as detailed in Para
26.
38.4.17 To assist the States/UTs, Insurance Intermediaries & CSC-VLEs with the requisite
reports/updates, for reconciliation of premium, payable/paid claims, application data,
service charges etc. for closure of the season.
38.4.18 To provide necessary inputs to the State Governments/UT Administration/SLCCCI
as required as per the notification or otherwise.
38.4.19 To implement the scheme as per the provisions of the Operational Guidelines,
Advisories, Manuals and SOPs issued by GoI from time to time and comply with the
terms and conditions of the tender document and provisions of the notifications
issued by the State Governments/UT Administrations from time to time.
38.5 Financial Institutions/Banks
38.5.1 For the purpose of PMFBY, scheduled banking institutions engaged in disbursing
KCC loan as per relevant guidelines of DA&FW, GoI, and NABARD/RBI shall be
reckoned as Banks.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
149

--- Page 150 ---
38.5.2 To comply with the Operational Guidelines, Notification, as well as other directives,
of the GoI and the State Governments/UT Administrations etc. and transact the
requisite functions on NCIP with given timelines for such functions.
38.5.3 To communicate notification, as well as other directives, guidelines, etc. to all
agencies & branches that fall within their jurisdiction.
38.5.4 To ensure that all agencies within their jurisdiction sanction additional loan
component to loanee farmers towards insurance premium payable by them.
38.5.5 To assist all farmers who want to opt-out from the scheme and maintain records of
all opt-out applications.
38.5.6 To ensure that all service (subordinate) bank branches within their jurisdiction serve
all non-loanee farmers desiring and eligible to take insurance cover under PMFBY.
Such a service will include opening of saving bank account of non-loanee farmers,
helping them to fill up the requisite details on NCIP, accepting premium from them
and maintaining records etc.
38.5.7 To ensure that the premium for both loanee and non-loanee farmers shall be
remitted to the concerned Insurance Companies and the related data is uploaded
on NCIP within the prescribed time.
38.5.8 Lead Bank/Administrative Offices of Banks should ensure that all farmers
sanctioned crop loans/seasonal operational loans, i.e., KCC loan for notified crop(s)
are necessarily insured (except for those farmers who have opted out) and strict
adherence of all provisions stated in the Operational Guidelines of the Scheme. No
eligible farmer should be deprived of insurance cover. Lead Banks/ Administrative
Offices of Banks, therefore, should make all efforts and pursue their branches for
enrolling all eligible loanee farmers and interested non-loanee farmers under crop
insurance. In case, claims have arisen during crop season then respective
defaulting bank and its branches would be responsible to make payment of
the admissible claims to loanee farmers who were deprived of insurance
cover.
38.5.9 To ensure digitization of insured farmer details on NCIP along with details of
remittance of premium within stipulated time. The consolidated premium of farmers'
share will be remitted electronically through the payment gateway of NCIP followed
by the compulsory challan generation & entry of payment details on the NCIP for
proper and timely reconciliation by the Insurance Companies. If the Concerned
Bank and its branches are not able to remit the amount of premium collected
/debited within defined timeline to the concerned Insurance Companies, then
they will be liable to pay the admissible claims to farmers who are deprived of
insurance cover.
38.5.10 To respond to the clarifications or rectification sought by the Insurance Companies
within 7 days. The banks should cross-check with their records and aberrations, if
any, should be brought to the notice of the Insurance Companies immediately. If no
response is received from banks within cut-off time or reconciliation period, the
details submitted on the NCIP shall be considered final and no changes will be
accepted later on. The Insurance Companies shall thereafter act as deemed fit as
per applicable provisions of these Guidelines to process the applications.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
150

--- Page 151 ---
38.5.11 To assist the States/UTs & Insurance Companies with the requisite reports/updates,
for reconciliation of premium, payable/paid claims, application data, service charges
etc. for closure of the season.
38.5.12 To compulsorily take Aadhaar number or Aadhaar enrolment number as per the
notification under Section 7 of the Aadhaar Act before sanctioning or renewal of KCC
loan and/or during enrollment under the scheme. Hence the coverage of loanee
farmers without Aadhaar number is not allowed and such accounts need to be
reviewed by the concerned bank branch regularly.
38.5.13 To permit the Insurance Companies to access all relevant records/ledgers related
to insured farmers at the Bank Branch and PACS for the purpose of scrutiny, if
desired by them.
38.5.14 To ensure that the farmers are not deprived of any benefit under the Scheme due to
errors of omission or commissions by the concerned bank branches or PACS, and
in case of such errors, the concerned banks shall be liable to pay the claims to the
beneficiary farmers.
38.5.15 To educate the farmers on the Scheme features, benefits and importance to get
enrolled under the scheme.
38.5.16 To guide the farmers on filling up the application for insurance on the NCIP and
collection of the required documents and record keeping of the same, particularly in
case of non-loanee farmers.
38.5.17 To collect Aadhaar Number, mobile number and intended crop wise sowing planning
of all eligible farmers well before the start of enrolment of farmers and debit of
premium.
38.5.18 To maintain the records of relevant documents, loan application and other
statements for the purpose of scrutiny and verification by the Insurance Company or
its authorized representatives and DLMC, if necessary.
38.5.19 To reconcile, validate and provide clarification, if necessary, on the coverage details
to the Insurance Companies within next 15 days from the cut-off date for data
uploading on the NCIP and within 7 days of the receipt of such request from
Insurance Companies.
38.5.20 To debit and collect the applicable premium from the farmer's account on or before
cut-off-date and remit it entirely to the concerned Insurance Company electronically.
38.5.21 Not to re-enroll the farmers under crop insurance for the same crop if the
State/District has notified prevented/failed sowing/germination or to enroll the same
land parcel number multiple times.
38.6 Common Service Centre- Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC-SPV)
38.6.1 To ensure enrolment of non-loanee farmers through its network of VLEs strictly as
per the provisions of Operational Guidelines.
38.6.2 To educate and train the VLEs on marketing and sale of crop insurance through the
NCIP at the Gram Panchayat level.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
151

--- Page 152 ---
38.6.3 To electronically remit the premium collected from the VLEs to the concerned
Insurance Companies in T+1 days from the date of receipt of premium from the
farmers.
38.6.4 To reconcile the data uploaded on NCIP and premium remittance to the concerned
Insurance Companies within 7 days post cut-off date for enrolment of farmers.
38.6.5 To raise an invoice for pre-agreed service charges per farmer per crop-season
application to the respective Insurance Companies on monthly basis through the
NCIP.
38.6.6 To ensure post sales services and facilitate grievance redressal of the insured
farmers.
38.6.7 To ensure that the applications reverted by the Insurance Companies due to any
error or omission is taken up for resolution immediately and is re-submitted to the
Insurance Company within 7 days from receipt of such applications.
38.6.8 To ensure that no VLE is involved in any moral hazard, forgery or unlawful activities
involving insuring other farmers land, allowing any third persons to take insurance
on other farmers land or misrepresentation of information or facts while entering data
of farmers on NCIP or taking money from farmers as service fee for enrolling them
on NCIP.
38.6.9 To take corrective and punitive actions against the erring and defaulting VLEs as
per prevalent legal provisions under the law.
38.6.10 To be responsible for accuracy of details and document of individual farmers
uploaded on NCIP and liable for claim payment due to errors and omissions
committed by VLEs. In case any application gets rejected owing to errors or omission
or commissions committed by the concerned CSC-VLEs in data entry and
document sharing at the time of enrollment of farmers and if the same is also not
rectified after reversion of application by the Concerned Insurance Company, the
Liability to pay the claims to the beneficiary farmers for all such rejected applications
shall rest with the CSC-eGov.
38.7 Common Service Centers - Village Level Entrepreneurs (CSC-VLE)
38.7.1 To educate and assist in the awareness of the farmers, especially non-loanee
farmers about the features of the Scheme. While accepting the application from the
individual farmers, CSC-VLE shall explain the provisions and provide details of the
documents required. They must also make the farmers aware of the consequences
of incorrect submission of information and documents. Further, they must ensure
that all the documents submitted by the farmers should be scrutinized thoroughly,
verified and uploaded on NCIP in legible form to avoid any anomaly or insufficiency
of any kind in the coverage of that particular farmer upon the quality check process
adopted by the concerned by Insurance Company.
38.7.2 To display the advertisement, publicity material, banner, poster, leaflets in its
premises for farmers as provided by the Insurance Companies and the State
Governments/UT Administrations.
38.7.3 To compulsorily take Aadhaar number or Aadhaar enrolment number as per the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
152

--- Page 153 ---
notification under Section 7 of Aadhaar Act. Hence the coverage of non-loanee
farmers without Aadhaar number is not allowed.
38.7.4 To fill up the online application on the NCIP and collect the required documents from
non- loanee farmers.
38.7.5 Collect the premium on behalf of the implementing Insurance Companies strictly as
per the provisions of the Scheme. VLEs shall not demand any service charges or
any extra amount from farmers other than the applicable premium amount. If any
CSC-VLE is found to ask for any additional monies from the farmers, the CSC-VLE
shall be de-empaneled by CSC e-Gov and a suitable legal action may also be
initiated against them.
38.7.6 To fill up the correct details of non-loanee farmers and upload the requisite
documents along with their mobile number on NCIP. Due care should be taken in
filling-up the details in the application form of each of the insured non- loanee farmer
and it should be cross-checked with the documents attached in the application.
38.7.7 The VLE should ensure that the insured farmers are not deprived of any benefit
under the Scheme due to errors or omissions or commissions by them, and if such
cases are reported, necessary administrative and legal action shall be initiated by
CSC e-Gov & the concerned Insurance Company or State Governments/UT
Administrations, for lapses in service/malpractices.
38.7.8 To issue acknowledgement receipt to the concerned farmer upon successful
submission of application under the scheme.
38.7.9 The CSC-VLE shall not be engaged in any kind of unlawful activities including but
not limited to insurance of land parcels of other farmers in their names or any other
farmer’s name or any kind of hacking of the digital platform leading to excess
insurance exceeding the land area of a parcel or insurance of non-agricultural land
parcels. If any such cases are reported or identified, the State Governments/UT
Administrations shall mandatorily initiate necessary administrative and legal actions
for such malpractices or fraudulent activities untaken by them. CSC e-Gov shall also
mandatorily take them off the CSC network for at least 3 years. All such actions
taken shall be reported by States/UTs and CSC e-Gov respectively to DA&FW within
90 days after the closure of enrollment cut-off date.
38.7.10 In case any application gets rejected owing to errors or omission or commissions
committed by the concerned CSC-VLEs in data entry and document sharing at the
time of enrollment of farmers and if the same is also not rectified after reversion of
application by the Concerned Insurance Company, the Liability to pay the claims to
the beneficiary farmers for all such rejected applications shall rest with the CSC-
eGov.
38.8 Designated Insurance Agents/Insurance Intermediaries
38.8.1 To educate and assist in awareness of the farmers especially the non-loanee
farmers about the features of the Scheme. While accepting the application from the
individual farmers, the Insurance Intermediaries shall explain the provisions and
provide details of the documents required. They must also make the farmers aware
of the consequences of incorrect submission of information and documents. Further,
they must ensure that all the documents submitted by the farmers should be
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
153

--- Page 154 ---
scrutinized thoroughly, verified and uploaded on NCIP in legible form to avoid any
anomaly or insufficiency of any kind in the coverage of that particular farmer upon
the quality check process adopted by the concerned Insurance Companies.
38.8.2 To display the advertisement, publicity material, banner, poster, leaflets in its
premises and remote kiosks/outlets established for enrollment of farmers as
provided by the Insurance Companies and State Governments/UT Administrations.
38.8.3 To compulsorily take Aadhaar number or Aadhaar enrolment number as per the
notification under Section 7 of Aadhaar Act. Hence the coverage of non-loanee
farmers without Aadhaar number is not allowed.
38.8.4 To fill up the online application on AIDE or NCIP and collect and upload the required
documents from non- loanee farmers.
38.8.5 Collect the premium on behalf of the implementing Insurance Companies, strictly as
per the provisions of the Scheme. Insurance Intermediaries shall not demand any
service charges or any extra amount from farmers other than the applicable premium
amount. If any Insurance Intermediary is found to ask for any additional monies from
the farmers, the Insurance Intermediary shall be de-empaneled by the concerned
insurance broker or Insurance Company or any such entity responsible for his/her
activities and a suitable legal action may also be initiated against them.
38.8.6 To fill up the correct details of non-loanee farmers and upload the requisite
documents along with their mobile number on AIDE or NCIP. Due care should be
taken in filling up the details in the application form of each of the insured non- loanee
farmer and it should be cross-checked with the documents attached in the
application.
38.8.7 The Insurance Intermediaries should ensure that the insured farmers are not
deprived of any benefit under the Scheme due to errors or omissions or commissions
by them, and if such cases are reported, necessary administrative and legal action
shall also be initiated by the concerned Insurance Company or State
Governments/UT Administrations for lapses in service or malpractices.
38.8.8 To issue acknowledgement receipt to the concerned farmer upon successful
submission of application under the scheme
38.8.9 To facilitate post sales services, claim intimation and grievance redressal of the
insured farmers.
38.8.10 The Insurance Intermediaries shall not be engaged in any kind of unlawful activities
including but not limited to insurance of land parcels of other farmers in their names
or any other farmer’s name or any kind of hacking of the digital platform leading to
excess insurance exceeding the land area of a parcel or insurance of non-
agricultural land parcels. If any such cases are reported or identified, the State
Govts./UTs shall mandatorily initiate necessary administrative and legal actions for
such malpractices or fraudulent activities untaken by them. The concerned
Insurance Companies shall also mandatorily take them off their distribution network
for at-least 3 years and report the same to IRDAI. All such actions taken shall be
reported by States/UTs and Insurance Companies respectively to DA&FW within 90
days after the closure of enrollment cut-off date.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
154

--- Page 155 ---
38.8.11 In case any application gets rejected owing to errors or omission or commissions
committed in data entry and document sharing at the time of enrollment of farmers
by the Insurance Intermediary engaged for enrollment directly by the Insurance
Company and if the same is also not rectified after reversion by the concerned
Insurance Company, the Liability to pay the claims to the beneficiary farmers for all
such rejected applications shall rest with the concerned Insurance Company.
38.9 In case any application gets rejected owing to errors or omission or commissions
committed in data entry and document sharing at the time of enrollment of farmers
by the Insurance Intermediary/Brokers engaged for enrollment directly through NCIP
and if the same is also not rectified after reversion by the concerned Insurance
Company, the Liability to pay the claims to the beneficiary farmers for all such
rejected applications shall rest with the concerned Insurance Intermediary/Broker.
38.10 Loanee Farmers
38.10.1 As the Scheme is made optional for all loanee farmers availing KCC loans for notified
crops, it is mandatory for all loanee farmers to submit a signed declaration in the
concerned bank branch in case they want to opt-out of the insurance coverage under
the Scheme for a particular season anytime during the year but at-least 7 days
before the cut-off date for enrolment and premium debiting. In case no such "Opt-
out" declaration is submitted by the farmer for the season, they shall be automatically
covered by the bank branch for the season. Any change in the crop plan should be
brought to the notice of the concerned KCC bank branch immediately but not later
than 2 days prior to the cutoff date for the enrolment and premium debiting. This
should be supported by a sowing certificate issued by the concerned village/ sub-
district level official of the State/UT.
38.10.2 All loanee farmers are compulsorily required to submit Aadhaar Number or copy of
Aadhaar card or authenticate themselves through Aadhaar enabled e-KYC along
with mobile number for enrolment under the crop insurance before the prescribed
cut-off date.
38.10.3 Insurance Proposals are accepted only up to a stipulated cut-off date for enrollment
of farmers and debiting of premium, which will be decided by the SLCCCI of the
concerned States/UT. Hence, loanee farmers may verify from the concerned bank
branches that applicable premium has been debited and remitted to the Insurance
Companies within the cut-off date and details are uploaded on the NCIP as well.
38.10.4 Give information of any loss due to a localized risk or a post-harvest loss due to
specified perils preferably to the Central Grievance Redressal helpline i.e. Krishi
Rakshak Portal & Helpline (KRPH) or to the concerned bank branch or enrollment
channel partner viz. CSC-VLE or Insurance Intermediaries or Insurance Company
within 72 hours.
38.10.5 Loanee farmers should not avail KCC/Agriculture Loan from multiple banks on the
same land or insure the same land through more than one bank branch or insure
the same land more than once as a non-loanee farmer. If any such cases are
reported or identified, the insurance cover shall be terminated, the premium shall be
forfeited, and necessary administrative and legal action may also be taken for such
malpractice by the concerned State/UT Government.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
155

--- Page 156 ---
38.11 Non-Loanee Farmers
38.11.1 All non-loanee farmers are compulsorily required to submit Aadhaar Number or copy
of Aadhaar card or authenticate themselves through Aadhaar enabled e-KYC along
with mobile number for enrolment under the crop insurance before the prescribed
cut-off date.
38.11.2 Insurance Proposals are accepted only up to a stipulated cut-off date for enrollment
of farmers and debiting of premium, which will be decided by the SLCCCI of the
concerned States/UT. Therefore, the Non-loanee farmers desirous of availing
insurance under the scheme for any notified crop in any notified insurance unit may
approach the nearest bank-branch or PACS or authorized channel partners or CSC-
VLEs or Insurance Intermediaries of Insurance Company or may also directly fill-up
the online application on the Mobile App or NCIP within cut-off date. The requisite
documents may also be simultaneously submitted along with the applicable
premium to concerned agency enrolling the farmers.
38.11.3 Applicants must sign and authorize electronically (using biometric authentication or
SMS validation) while enrolling under the scheme along with submitting a copy of
the LPC/Land Records or contract document or any other document defined by the
concerned State/UT Government to identify share-cropper or tenant farmer, sowing
certificate or self-declaration of intent to sow the proposed crop and copy of bank
pass book to the agency enrolling the farmers.
38.11.4 The farmer desiring coverage under crop insurance should open an operative saving
bank account in the branch of the designated bank, and the details should be
provided while submitting the application for the same. Non-loanee farmers should
also link the bank account number with Aadhaar number to enable remittance of
claims through AEPS directly into the desired account number.
38.11.5 The farmer should correctly mention their land identification number or survey
number to enable clear identification of the land parcel during the currency of the
insurance cover.
38.11.6 To notify implementing Insurance Company in the event of change of crop or sown
area being different from the details previously declared in the application form at-
least 2 days before the cut-off date for enrollment of farmers and collection of
premium amounts.
38.11.7 The farmer must furnish area sown confirmation certificate or the self-declaration of
intent to sow the proposed notified crop(s) as per requirement of the notification
published by the State/UT.
38.11.8 Give information of any loss due to a localized risk or a post-harvest loss due to
specified perils preferably to the Central Grievance Redressal helpline i.e. Krishi
Rakshak Portal & Helpline (KRPH) or to the concerned bank branch or enrollment
channel partner viz. CSC-VLE or Insurance Intermediaries or Insurance Company
within 72 hours.
38.11.9 The non-loanee farmer should not insure the same land more than once or same
land through multiple channels of enrollment. The non-loanee farmers should also
not insure the land parcel belonging to other farmers which is not leased-out or taken
on share-cropping. They should also not insure the non-agricultural land parcels or
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
156

--- Page 157 ---
the land belonging to public or Govt. entities. If any such cases are reported or
identified, the insurance cover shall be terminated, the premium shall be forfeited,
and necessary administrative and legal action may also be taken for such
malpractice by the concerned State/UT Government.
39 National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) for Administration of Crop
Insurance Program under PMFBY
39.1.1 In the implementation of the scheme, multiple stakeholders are involved at different
stages from enrolment of farmers till the claim disbursement to farmers. A hallmark
of the Scheme is leveraging technology adoption for the effective and auto-
administration of the scheme. In an endeavor to integrate technology in the
implementation and execution of the Scheme, the DA&FW, GoI has designed and
developed a National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) (https://pmfby.gov.in) which
serves as a centralized digital platform for all stakeholders. The idea behind
developing a web-based, integrated digital platform is to speed up service delivery,
unify fragmented databases, act as a single source of all data and information,
eliminate manual processes and thus provide faster insurance services to farmers.
This in turn will bring in better administration, transparency and coordination
amongst stakeholders viz., Farmers, State/UTs, Insurance Companies, Banks,
Common Service Centre-VLEs (CSC-VLEs) & other channel partners and help in
administration, monitoring and operationalization of scheme components along with
real time dissemination of information. The NCIP captures the entire data relating to
insured crops and also serves as the repository for the data relating to the crop
insurance scheme.
39.2 The NCIP shall provide a single Information Technology (IT) enabled platform for
digitization of processes and information data bank and dissemination mechanism,
automation of administrative procedures, integration of information and systems
across multiple external platforms and data sources, information validation and
premium and claim calculation and remittance etc. This IT driven system aims at
addressing the issues which affect the current system of program administration,
thereby reducing the scheme’s efficacy and leads to denial or delay in benefit
transfer to farmers viz. selective or layered information access, manual
interventions, multi-step procedures, documentary evidence/proofs,
delayed/defective information sharing etc. Hence, integration of IT platforms of
banks, Insurance Companies, State/UTs Governments. Yield & weather data
providers, Digital Land Records, UIDAI etc., with NCIP directly or through an
interface for fetching in information, is felt essential to avoid errors for timely
transmission of requisite information amongst major stakeholders, early settlement
of claims, proper monitoring and transparent administration of the Schemes. Once
the entire linking of IT platforms of all stakeholders with the Web Portal is
established, it would also lead to faster processing of claims due to electronic flow
of information.
39.3 The conceptualization and development of the NCIP has already been completed
and launched and facilitates for the notification digitization, farmers application
enrolment, application management, user management, subsidy release
management, claim disbursement etc. Few other functionalities are proposed to be
made available in the upcoming version of NCIP wherein following modules have
been planned to be incorporated or enhanced and rolled out in coming future.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
157

--- Page 158 ---
39.4 Different Modules of NCIP
39.4.1 Integration with Public Fund Management System
The NCIP has been integrated with PFMS and a module known as DigiClaim has
been developed for managing financial transactions to facilitate release of State/UT
and GoI share of premium subsidy, Bank Account and AEPS verification and
payment of insurance claims by the Insurance Companies to the farmers.
39.4.2 Online Remittance of Premium by Financial Institutions
A third-party payment gateway has already been integrated with NCIP for the
remittance of farmer premium by the Bank branches and other channels partners
like CSC eGov & Insurance Intermediaries. The remitted amount is added in a wallet
of the Bank-Branch, CSC-VLE or Insurance Intermediary for onward remittance to
the concerned Insurance Company implementing the scheme in a particular
geographical area. These partner agencies (Bank Branches, CSC-VLEs &
Insurance Intermediaries) can remit the premium amount multiple times to the
concerned Insurance Companies before the cut-off-date. For each transaction, a
Unique ID (UTR) is assigned using which reconciliation of payments and
applications is done by the Insurance Companies.
39.4.3 Add-on Coverage of Crop Risk
The State/UT has the option to notify Add-on perils cover with or without Basic Cover
(Yield base cover). Selection of risk has been made available on portal as per the
provisions available in the guidelines. In the notification module, an option has been
provided to the States/UTs to select the add-on coverage separately according to
the crop and insurance unit along with the Basic Cover as per the notification. Claim
will be calculated on DigiClaim as per the add-on coverage opted for the crop and
IU.
39.4.4 Land Record Integration
Land record detail is one of the critical requirements under the PMFBY scheme for
validation of insured area. Manual verification of the land record data is a sheer
challenge. Many State/UTs have digitized land record system, however their
hierarchal system and practices are different. DA&FW has moved ahead to integrate
the land record system of 10 major states with NCIP to validate the farmer's land
parcel with land record system at the time of enrollment under the scheme.
State/UTs shares the land record API subsequent to which customization of API
consumption for integration of land records of the State(s) with NCIP is executed.
The land record details of the farmers is required to be entered during enrolment
process and rest of the land details viz. extent of land, ownership share and names
of owners/shareholders are fetched through the State/UT land record portal.
In the Future, as and when the Agri-Stack system becomes operational, the farmer’s
Golden ID along with land records, land area, cadastral maps and sown crop details
shall be fetched & validated using it.
39.4.5 Location Master Management
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
158

--- Page 159 ---
Location master is the base for the effective implementation of the PMFBY Scheme.
The scheme implementation is based on the State's revenue hierarchy. The revenue
hierarchy is dynamic, differs from State to State and there might be changes from
season to season on account of re-organization of revenue units or creation of new
units. NCIP is therefore required to be equipped with related provisions to capture
the re-organization of the hierarchy. The location master being used in NCIP is
primarily based on Local Government Directory location codes as provided by
MoPR.
Option for addition, amendment and deletion of revenue unit is being considered
under the revenue location hierarchy in the NCIP database. The option will work in
a maker and checker scenario. Stakeholders like Bank, CSC, Districts, etc. can
request the addition of the location unit. State will verify the request and either
approve or reject. System will validate the request and display its analysis to the
States as a helping tool.
39.4.6 Multi-lingual Portal
Existing crop insurance portal supports 11 regional languages including Hindi.
However, the data is entered in English only. To support the multilingual data, it is
required to convert the data into State specific local language. Web pages of the
NCIP will be enabled in all the supporting languages along with English.
39.4.7 Seasonality Discipline
Scheme PMFBY/RWBCIS are driven by seasonality discipline and accordingly the
provisions under the portal for different users shall be automated as per the dates
notified.
39.4.8 CCE Agri App for Crop Yield Estimation
Mobile applications have been developed and is being used for capturing the CCE
data from the field and for uploading on the server. CCE Agri app works in both
online and offline mode. CCE Agri app captures, Form-1, Form-2 & Form-3 data
along with geo-coordinated photographs. It is customizable as per the requirement
of the States. Further, following functionalities have also been enabled:
a) CCE schedule digitization
State/UTs schedules the CCE for the insurance unit and crop. State selects the
village (If IU is at higher level) and plot (Survey/Sub Survey no.) randomly for
conducting the CCE. There are two ways to select the CCE plot i.e. through smart
sampling technique or conventional method. In State/UT's login, option to declare
the randomly selected village of the IU and survey number /sub survey number of
CCE field for a crop shall be developed. State shall declare the locations for the
selection of CCE field according to smart sampling technique or the conventional
technique. In smart sampling technique, the geo-coordinates and survey/sub survey
number for the CCE field are shared currently by MNCFC through conventional
method which going forward shall be shared through the APIs. Under the
conventional method, the survey number shall be selected though the random
sampling mechanism. Further, the schedule of the CCE shall be approved by the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
159

--- Page 160 ---
State/UTs. The approved schedule shall then be available to the concerned
insurance company for co-observing the CCEs.
b) Smart Sampling Technique
GoI through MNCFC or CPMU shall share the Geo-coordinates of the CCE field
through API and the same will be shared to the CCE-Agri App based on the
declaration done by the State for the use of smart sampling technique. CCE Agri
App will validate the CCE primary worker's geo-coordinate with the co-ordinates
shared for smart sampling technique and ensure the authenticity of location and
CCE Plot.
c) State Specific customization
CCE specifications may differ from State to State i.e. measurement units of CCE
field, shape of CCE plot etc. State specific customization has already been made for
the smooth implementation of CCE through CCE Agri App across all States/UTs.
39.4.9 Digitization and Customized Notification
Notification is the basis for the enrolment of application of farmers under NCIP.
Under notification, the State declares the crop, premium rate, scale of finance and
other parameters. Accordingly, premium amount is calculated on the basis of the
premium rate and scale of finance defined under notification. Revised guidelines
allow State/UTs to exempt the farmer's premium but, in such cases, differential
premium is borne by the State Govt./UT. However, in this scenario at least Re.1 per
application is taken from farmer as token money to have the record of such
applications on the Portal and also to facilitate electronic tracking, enrolment
validations & reconciliation. Also, if the State/UT provides the exemption for the
farmer's premium for certain limit of land area, the same also have been provided
on the NCIP. Two additional variants of customizable notification are as follows:
a) Absolute amount-based farmer premium
In case of enabling option in notification to declare the farmer premium in absolute
amount the State needs to enter the premium amount instead of percentage.
However, the total amount of farmer premium shall not exceed the amount
calculated in terms of percentage defined in the Operational Guidelines. Also, the
State/UT may define that this exemption shall be facilitated on the first cum first
serve basis up to certain limit. For example, for the first 1,000 applications the farmer
premium may be Rs.1 or Rs. 100 only.
b) Limited area-based notification
State limits the farmer premium subsidy upto certain limit of the insured area for a
farmer. If the insured area exceeds the defined limit, then farmer has to pay the full
premium for the exceeded area insured. The notification module has already been
developed to cater to such requirements and customization.
39.4.10 Subsidy Release Framework
Premium Subsidy is an important feature of the scheme. GoI and State/UT
Government share the insurance premium subsidy with implementing Insurance
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
160

--- Page 161 ---
Companies on behalf of insured farmers. The subsidy release framework is being
implemented through NCIP to keep track of the movement of subsidy from the
State/UTs and the GoI to the Insurance Companies.
The NCIP shall auto-calculate the State and Central Subsidy as per the applicable
provisions of Operational Guidelines, State Notification and on the basis of
applications approved on NCIP. Accordingly, Insurance companies raise the
subsidy release request with the State Government/UT Administration through
NCIP.
All the subsidy release sanction order are entered by the State/UT and the GoI on
NCIP for the purpose of reconciliation, payment and audit purposes.
39.4.11 Crop Insurance App for Self Service
Crop Insurance App is mobile based app developed for the farmers for self-service
related to all requirements under PMFBY. Through this app, farmers can enroll
themselves directly and can track the status of their application and the status of the
claims. The app has also been enabled for Crop Loss Intimation.
39.4.12 Monitoring Framework/MIS Dashboard
Module wise web reports for monitoring the progress of schemes on different
parameters for different stakeholders has already been made available on NCIP
which can be accessed using separate logion credentials. These reports are
granular, having information till the lower level. Comparative reports with earlier
respective seasons on different parameters for the users have been developed and
are available for all stakeholders.
Search module has also been available in each stakeholder's login on different
parameters like Policy search, Farmer search, Notification search, Bank-Branch
Search, Location master Search, User Search etc.
39.4.13 DigiClaim: Automatic Claim Calculation and Settlement
DigiClaim module has been developed on NCIP with functionality for claim
calculation, claim approval/rejection and settlement using PFMS platform. Modules
have also been developed for the States/UTs to upload and approve the IU and crop
wise and season-wise AY and TY values. States/UTs are also required to upload
the loss cost under Preventive Sowing/Failed Germination and Mid-Season
Adversity claims. Insurance Companies are required to accept the AY & TY values
uploaded and approved by States/UTs and also accept the loss cost under
Preventive Sowing/Failed Germination and Mid-Season Adversity claims. Once the
values are finally accepted, the corresponding claims are calculated automatically
for further processing of claims settlement though PFMS platform directly into
farmer’s account.
States/UTs are also required to approve the Loss Cost for claims under RWBCIS
which is uploaded by the concerned Insurance Company on NCIP before the
calculation of corresponding claims. Once the claims are calculated, the same are
processed through PFMS platform for direct remittance into farmers bank account.
Provisions for following Claims Type have also been developed:
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
161

--- Page 162 ---
a) Prevented Sowing
b) Mid-Season Adversity
c) Localized Risks
d) Post-Harvest Losses
e) Yield based Widespread Calamities
f) Add-on Cover Claim settlement under PMFBY
g) Weather Based Claims for RWBCIS
h) Add-on Cover Claim settlement under RWBCIS
39.4.14 Centralized Call Centre—KRPH (14447)
A National level integrated grievance redressal mechanism having digital portal and
a call centre named as Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline (KRPH) has been
developed to enable farmers to lodge their grievances/concerns/queries. The KRPH
has a short code Toll-Free number 14447 for farmers to call and raise their
concerns, queries and grievances.
KRPH has also been dovetailed with National Crop Insurance Portal and integrated
with all stakeholders viz. Insurance Companies, Banks, CSC-VLEs, District
Administration and State Govt. departments for real-time tracking, monitoring and
redressal of grievances and queries of the farmers covered under PMFBY.
39.4.15 WINDS – Hyperlocal Weather Data Platform
WINDS (Weather Information Network & Data System) is a pioneering initiative of
the country to set-up a network of Automatic Weather Stations & Rain Gauges at
Taluk/Block and Gram Panchayat level to create a strong database of hyper-local
weather data for the different Govt. and other entities to use for all farmer and
farming oriented services. The hyper-local weather data so collected will be used for
claim assessment under Parametric Crop insurance, Yield estimation through
Technology, Crop-Region specific Agriculture Advisories to the Farmers, Disaster
Risk Resilience & Mitigation needs. As of now the country has approx. 13,000 AWS
and 20,000 ARGs installed for all institutions including IMD. Under WINDS, an
additional 3,500 AWS and Approx. 1.6 lakh ARGs are proposed to be established
across the country. IMD and DA&FW have collaborated for setting up this network
to make it 5 times of what it is today.
The data collected from AWS should be available in the WINDS portal designed and
developed by DA&FW, GoI. This will also act as the single data pipeline for data
related to Rainfall/Weather stations across the country. This data will be a Digital
Public Good. The WINDS portal shall be maintained & hosted by DA&FW, GoI.
The Ministry of Earth Sciences/IMD will be responsible for the supervision,
regulation and ensuring quality standards as per WINDS framework to ensure
accuracy of the data. In order to foster & leverage the value of information and data
for welfare and betterment of farmers and citizens, the data shall be available to
users and concerned stakeholders through standard APIs.
39.4.16 AIDE App for Enrollment through Intermediaries
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
162

--- Page 163 ---
In addition to the existing channels of enrolment for non-loanee farmers viz. CSC,
Banks, Post Offices etc., a smart-phone App also has been designed and rolled out
in Kharif 2023 for enrolment of farmers at their doorsteps through a large network of
Insurance Intermediaries. This App has been designed to streamline the process of
enrolment and offer a completely paper-less and cash-less experience to a farmer
to get enrolled by leveraging the digital technology for registration, documentation
and premium payment.
As of now the option is enabled for the insurance company for which the cluster is
allocated i.e. L1 insurance company as per bidding process. As per the guidelines,
other empaneled Insurance Companies which have participated in the bidding and
are keen for enrolment of non-loanee farmers in the cluster may also be allowed to
enroll non-loanee farmers at L1 premium rate. The interested companies have to
inform their willingness in writing within seven days of finalization of tender/issuance
of work order to L1. The AIDE App shall be enabled for such interested Insurance
Companies to also do the enrollment of farmers under PMFBY.
39.4.17 SARTHI for Risk Resilience though Insurance
To facilitate a comprehensive risk protection environment for Agriculture and Rural
sector, GoI has developed an open-source digital platform called Sandbox for
Agricultural & Rural Security, Technology & Insurance Platform , which will
provide seamless integration of different insurance products approved by IRDAI &
offered by Insurance Companies and allow for digital distribution of the products via
various distribution channels directly to the farmers through a farmer facing
application. This digital platform (Mobile App & Web Platform) will help offer the
bouquet of products curated by the insurance companies for the agriculture & rural
communities and will offer customized insurance products tailored as per the specific
needs and the risks faced by the farming & rural households in different regions
across complete agriculture value chain.
39.4.18 Integration of NCIP with Crop Insurance portal of State/UTs
Some States e.g., Karnataka have their own crop insurance portals and farmers
data is captured on their State portal. Integration of State's portal with the NCIP is
required for the flow of information for centralized monitoring.
In this case, the State shares the API for transferring the data from State's Portal to
NCIP. The APIs get tested with the input parameter for the desired output. All the
attributes related to farmer, farmer enrolment, threshold yield, actual yield, claims
etc. are to be shared. Any update in the records must be brought into sync with the
NCIP.
39.4.19 Integration of NCIP with the External Agencies using Block Chain
technology
Insurance Companies and Banks are one of the important stakeholders for the
implementation of the scheme and provide crop insurance to the farmers. Farmers'
applications, entered into the NCIP by the banks and other channel partners, are
validated by the Insurance Companies and approval, reversion or rejection of
applications happen. The Banks and Insurance Companies have their own system
for application creation and processing respectively. Integration of NCIP with the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
163

--- Page 164 ---
internal tech system of the Insurance Companies and Banks will be done for the flow
of information to-and-fro in an automated manner over block chain network. Block
chain nodes shall be created at NCIP and at the Insurance Company’s and Bank’s
end. Farmer Applications and other relevant details will be replicated to the
respective Insurance Company and Bank database. NCIP and external partner’s
nodes shall always be in sync. Changes in NCIP node will automatically update the
information on other partner’s node over block chain network. NCIP node will be the
primary source of data.
39.4.20 SMS and Instant messaging platform
SMS platform has already been enhanced for sending the intimation or
acknowledgement to the stakeholders. SMS is sent for every change in the status
of the application for the farmer and also at the time of initiation of eligible claims to
the farmer’s account. Additionally, instant messaging platforms have also been
developed for real-time interactive communication involving AI enabled chat-bot
system.
39.4.21 Change of Crop/s
Farmers, having crop loan from financial institutions, covered under the
Scheme, can change the insured crop up to 2 working days before the cut-
off-date. Farmer can raise the crop change request for the current season as
per the applicable guideline for which interface shall be developed on the
NCIP, Crop Insurance App, and Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline (KRPH) for
enabling the same. Intimation of the crop change request and its status
tracker shall also be shared with the farmer via SMS. Crop change request
shall also be displayed to the concerned stakeholder for necessary action.
Due to the change in insured crop, sum insured, and premium will change
accordingly. Changes in application details due to change in crop will be
carried out on NCIP & Crop Insurance App under which a crop change facility
shall be provided. Option to handle excess and short farmer premium shall
also be provided which shall enable correction in premium amount as per
changed crop specifications.
39.4.22 Aadhaar Vault implementation
Aadhaar Number and Aadhaar related information to be encrypted by a reference
key and stored in Aadhaar Vault; all protocols to be defined as per UIDAI guidelines
shall be implemented for the purpose.
39.4.23 YES-TECH- Platform for Technology Based Yield Estimation
YES-TECH (Yield Estimation based on Technology) is a technology-based yield
estimations mechanism which has been developed after 2 years of rigorous testing
and pilot runs across 100 districts of the country. Crop Loss assessment and Yield
estimation approaches assisted by data inputs from sources such as Remote
Sensing indices, Weather indices WINDS and/or IMD, crop phenological
information, soil types etc. using approved models have been finalized for adoption.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
164

--- Page 165 ---
YES-TECH provides for minimum 30% threshold for technology driven yield for
arriving at the final crop yield value for the crops identified and approved for YES-
TECH. These values of technology driven crop yield along with multiple modeling
and data synthesis are required to be digitized and made available on a digital
platform to enable utilization of same by different stakeholders. A digital platform
therefore is envisaged to be developed for all practical purposes under YES-TECH.
Yield Calculated under YES-TECH will be reviewed on a six-monthly basis by a
High-Power Committee. The learnings and feedback shall be used for improving
the existing models, including those being used at the National level by MNCFC.
The raw data shall also be used by MNCFC and DES for triangulation of yield
estimates and for further Research & Development. Yield Data is of the nature of
public good therefore there will be a Central repository of yield data so that it is
accessible to the insurers, researchers and others interested stakeholders.
39.4.24 Auto-Calculation of Service Charges
The bank Head Offices, CSC e-Gov & Insurance Intermediaries shall request service
charges from Insurance Companies based on approved applications for the
respective season. The Bank HQ, CSC e-Gov & Insurance Intermediaries shall
compulsorily enter the GST details and details of the bank accounts for remittance of
service charge on NCIP to facilitate online generation and routing of the bank service
charge invoice for the use of concerned Insurance Company and remittance of the
same electronically while creating transaction logs on NCIP for tracking and
reconciliation.
In cases where the farmer's premium is borne by the Government, the service
charges shall be calculated on the actual farmer’s premium as is pre-defined in these
guidelines irrespective of the amount deducted/paid.
The NCIP shall calculate the applicable service charges for Bank, CSC and
Insurance Intermediaries based on the approved applications. It shall be calculated
at the end of the season to minimize the variation. Auto calculated service charges
along with demand/invoice from the concerned partner shall be available in
insurance company login for approval. The validated service charges shall be paid
electronically to the concerned agencies by the Insurance Companies as per the
timelines envisaged under the Operational Guidelines.
39.4.25 NCIP as a Single Source of Truth for Risk Analysis
NCIP shall be developed to be a single source of truth for all data and statistics
related to PMFBY ranging from Historical crop yield data, weather data, remote
sensing indices, coverage and claim details etc. NCIP shall transition from being a
data repository to an auto-administrating mechanism for implementation of scheme
as per the provisions and applicable guidelines.
Further, the NCIP shall also have module to analyze the underlying risk and auto-
calculate the loss cost/burn cost to assist the States/UTs to compare and evaluate
the cost of premium quoted by the Insurance Companies through the bidding
process. Apart from this, the NCIP shall also assist GoI in defining its liabilities
towards premium subsidy across states especially for the states/UTs who are
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
165

--- Page 166 ---
implementing Cup & Cap Models.
39.4.26 Crop Monitoring through Digital Crop Survey (DCS) and CROPIC: Deep
Technology for Crop Loss Assessment
CROPIC shall be mandatory for implementing Insurance Companies & State
Government/UTs to use though their field resources for collection & monitoring of
crop health & stress/calamity. Further the App may be used by farmers to
crowdsource the photographs during the crop life cycle & during calamity affecting
the crops. Further, the pictures collected through CROPIC Mobile App shall remain
within the NCIP server and may be consumed though APIs for validation, analytics
& research by other DPIs of the Govt. and external entities duly
approved/empaneled by GoI as & when required.
The photograph received from Digital Crop Survey shall be used for validation of
sown and insured crops whereas the photographs received from CROPIC Mobile
App shall be used for crop health monitoring over entire crop life cycle, crop damage
assessment at the time of any localized and wide-spread calamity or climatic
condition affecting the crops for making the quick claim payment and also act as an
input for Technology based yield estimation models.
While using the CROPIC Mobile App, details of location (village), name of sown Crop
and polygon with latitude-longitude of subject Land Parcel shall be mandatorily
captured. For the intended purpose it is not mandatory to identify the land-parcel ID,
cadastral map of land parcel & details of cultivating farmer for randomized
mechanism of Crop Health Monitoring. However, for the purpose of Crop Damage
Assessment on specific land parcel, land parcel ID & Insured Farmers details shall
be captured though App and validated against the insurance data as available on
NCIP and also against the data provided through Agri-Stack wherever applicable.
Further, under another initiative of GoI, named as Digital Crop Survey (DCS), one
time photograph of crop at each land parcel of the country at any stage during entire
crop life cycle is envisaged to be collected. The data from this one-time crop picture
at each land parcel taken under DCS may also be used for verification of crop being
cultivated on the particular land parcel with the insured crop for pre and/or post
insurance validation & QC purpose. For this the corresponding data collected shall
be consumed through APIs however the pictures collected under DCS shall remain
within the DCS/designated server and may be fetched through APIs for validation
for insurance as and when required.
The Pictures and data collected through CROPIC shall all be fed into a specially
developed digital system and will be used for crop identification, crop health
monitoring at different stages, further analytics, exceptions identification and
triangulated informatics & decision support system including verification of perils like
mid-season adversity, pertaining to Insurance & other agricultural objectives.
39.4.27 Integration with Agri-Stack & Krishi DSS
Govt. of India is developing a Digital Public Infrastructure in the country which
captures and maintains farmer registry, crop sown registry, and geo-referenced
village maps. Agri-Stack shall enable interconnecting various digital databases
spread across various States/UTs and other public & private entities across the
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
166

--- Page 167 ---
country and globally also for leveraging various digital capabilities to increase the
efficiency and service delivery across various farmer welfare schemes being run by
the Central Govt. & State Governments/UT Administrations. One such DPI is Agri-
Stack wherein a Digital centralized switch will act as a conduit between multiple
users and databases across the country & beyond. The information and data being
collected through various sources and modes then shall be converged together for
an informed and fortified decision support system known as Krishi DSS platform.
For effective and efficient management of PMFBY, the DA&FW will rely on the data
sharing mechanism of AgriStack. The relevant data pertinent to implementation of
scheme shall be consumed electronically (using open API) for the purposes of
beneficiary identification, verification, benefit delivery and monitoring pertaining to
the States. Districts and villages where these data are available. The information as
and when collected and collated in the Farmers registry, digital crop surveys, and
geo-referenced village maps shall be used for implementation of this scheme. The
NCIP shall therefore be integrated with Agri-Stack & Krishi DSS to leverage huge
capacities of both the systems to bring in more efficient and objective
implementation of PMFBY and other insurance programs under SARTHI.
39.4.28 Validation of Farmers, Land and Crops with KCC Ecosystem
A large proportion of insured farmers under PMFBY comes from loanee farmers
having Short Term Agriculture Operational Loans i.e. Kisan Credit Cards (KCC)
through institutional financing channels i.e. SCB, RRB & Coop Banks.
It is therefore important to identify and validate the farmers, their land details and
crops sown with the details entered for insurance purposes to rule out any mis-
utilization or misreporting under the scheme. This will also assist in identification of
farmers who have not been enrolled under PMFBY despite they not opting out of the
scheme and therefore help in fixing responsibilities on the erring banks and
branches for knowingly depriving the farmers from the benefits of the scheme.
39.4.29 Integration with Various Digital Platforms
To streamline the flow of information amongst stakeholders, the portal will also be
integrated with the system/data being developed by multiple other platforms and
digital public infrastructure:
a) Settlement of Yield data disputes or disputes relating to crop loss.
b) ACF (Area Correction Factor) for insured crop for every season.
c) Satellite data-based Clustering.
d) Integration of smart sampling tool for CCE plot selection.
e) Integration of innovative technology driven approach for rationalization of CCE.
f) Integration with the technique that is being developed for estimation of crop yield at
Gram Panchayat level.
g) Cadastral level crop and land ownership verification.
h) Smart Sampling technique.
i) Agristack and Agri DSS being developed by GoI for the purpose of various data
validation and standardization protocols.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
167

--- Page 168 ---
ANNEXURE – I
Add-on Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by Wild Animals
1. Coverage for Crop Loss due to Attack by Wild Animals:
1.1 The provision for cover against losses to crops due to attack of wild animals
wherever the risk is perceived to be substantial (equivalent to or more than the
indemnity level under PMFBY), is identifiable and is not frequent or regular shall be
covered. It is intended for farmers whose crop fields are likely to be affected by
raiding or grazing or by the impact of damage by movement of wild animals
occasionally affecting the individual isolated farms. This cover is intended to provide
protection against such incidences causing irreversible damage to the standing and
insured crop.
1.2 The definition of wild animals will be as per the categorization of the MoEF&CC
and/or Forest Department of respective State Govt./UT based on historic analysis
of yield losses of crops occurred. Hence, the nodal department of the State
Governments/UT Administrations implementing the scheme should obtain the
consent and validation from MoEF&CC and/or State Govt. /UT forest department for
list of area/IU wise prevalent Wild animals.
2. Risks Covered:
2.1 Initially this add-on cover would be available on a pilot basis. In the initial stages of
pilot, the add-on cover against losses due to wild animals would be available for
those crops only which have a history of demonstrable economic loss by attack of
wild animals and the cover shall be available up to the limit of indemnity level notified
by the State/UT. List of these wild animals will be notified by State Governments/UT
Administrations, preferably notified area/IU wise.
2.2 Notification of the wild animals covered under add-on cover shall be done in area(s)
and crop(s) to be notified under the scheme.
3. Risk Acceptance:
3.1 As substantial historic yield data is not available to establish the economic losses to
crops by attack of wild animals, actuarial pricing is not possible at present for this
add-on cover. However, states having 10-12 years historic yield loss data attributed
to crops by wild animals can ask for a separate premium rate for this add-on cover
along with the PMFBY tender, although the add-on actuarial premium rate will be
considered separately and shall not form a part of the evaluation of L1 bidder for
PMFBY. Further, same Insurance company shall implement PMFBY and add-on
cover of loss due to attack by wild animals in a given district or cluster. L1 bidder of
PMFBY will be asked to match the L1 rate of add-on coverage. In case L1 PMFBY
bidder doesn't agree to match the L1 add-on coverage rates, State may negotiate
with L1 PMFBY bidder for coverage of add-on cover due to wild animals.
3.2 States may ensure that the actuarial premium rate quoted by the Insurance
Companies should be rational basis the past loss experience. Under this provision
all risks will be borne by the concerned Insurance Companies.
3.3 Alternatively, those states not having requisite historical yield loss data to crops
damaged by the attack of wild animals to determine the rational actuarial premium
rate, can consider implementing this add-on cover on corpus model. However, there
should be some past experience of demonstrable crop losses by wild animals. The
State Govt./UT shall ask for a separate administrative service fee for implementation
of add-on cover along with the PMFBY tender, however, the administrative service
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
168

--- Page 169 ---
fee shall be considered separately and shall not form a part of the evaluation of L1
bidder for PMFBY. Further, same Insurance company will implement PMFBY and
add-on cover of loss due to attack by wild animals in a given district or cluster. L1
bidder of PMFBY will be asked to match the L1 administrative service fee. In case
L1 PMFBY bidder doesn't agree to match the administrative service fee, State/UT
may negotiate with L1 PMFBY bidder for providing operational support for
implementation of add-on cover due to wild animals.
3.4 The total liability towards crop loss due to Add-on cover of wild animal attack shall
be met first from PMFBY and only differential claims shall be met from the add-on
cover. In case any farmer has 100% crop loss due to attack of wild animals then the
farmer will not be eligible for any claims under PMFBY. The total liability under the
add-on cover shall be limited to the value of indemnity level multiplied with the total
sum insured. Farmer shall be eligible for claims as per the provisions applicable for
Localized Calamity as defined under Para 21.5 of these guidelines.
3.5 State Governments/UT Administrations opting for corpus model for the
implementation of this add-on cover will create a corpus fund at the State level to
provide claims to eligible farmers over and above the claims exceeding the eligible
claims under normal PMFBY. Any claims arising for this add-on cover will be paid
from the corpus fund with 100% contribution from concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations through the State/UT Forest Department or Nodal Department
implementing PMFBY, provided the concerned departments have the available
provisions /allocation for the same. Detailed modalities of Corpus fund and its
management shall be framed by the concerned State Governments/UT
Administrations in consultation with their concerned department/MoEF&CC well
before floating the tender for greater transparency and better understanding of the
add-cover amongst the other stakeholders.
3.6 Under corpus mode, the Insurance Companies under PMFBY for the respective
season will also act as an implementing agency for this add-on cover at defined
rational administrative charges notified by the State Governments/UT
Administrations at the time of the tender in consultation with the Insurance
Companies. The notional premium of the farmers should at least be equivalent to
the administrative service fee being charged by the implementing Insurance
Companies.
3.7 This add-on cover would run concurrently and follow the cut-off dates as specified
in seasonality discipline of PMFBY and shall be available for only those farmers who
are enrolled under PMFBY. Farmers who opt for this cover shall be enrolled after
payment of a notional premium notified by the state governments/UT
Administrations at the time of the notification for both alternatives mentioned above.
The States/UTs may also subsidize the farmers’ share of premium for add-on cover
fully or partially as per their discretion however, there would not be any subsidy
liability on the Central Govt. for the same.
Claim Payment Illustration:
Case - I:
Sum Insured = Rs.1,00,000
Yield Based Claims = Rs. 60,000
Crop loss due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = Rs.40,000
Indemnity Level = 80%
Claims due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = Rs.40,000 X 80% = 32,000
Total admissible claims to the Farmers = Rs. 60,000
Liability of claims met through PMFBY (Insurance Company) = Rs. 60,000
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
169

--- Page 170 ---
Liability on Add-on Cover (Insurance Company or Corpus Fund) = Nil
Case - II:
Sum Insured = Rs.1,00,000
Yield Based Claims = Rs. 40,000
Crop loss due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = Rs.70,000
Indemnity Level = 80%
Claims due to Add-on Coverage (Wild Animals) = Rs.56,000
Total admissible claims to the Farmers = Rs. 56,000
Liability of claims met through PMFBY (Insurance Company) = Rs. 40,000
Liability on Add-on Cover (Insurance Company or Corpus Fund) = Rs. 16,000
Note: If the loss due to add-on cover happens mid-season, claim for the same should be paid
to the farmer first by the Insurance Company or through the corpus as the case may
be. In case the add-on cover is implemented through corpus fund, the Insurance
Company implementing PMFBY shall be replenished by the corpus fund for the
additional claim liability under Add-on cover after payment of eligible claims under
normal PMFBY.
3.8 As mentioned in Para 5.2.5 of these OGs of PMFBY, the financial liability towards
claims under corpus mode of this add-on cover shall be borne by the concerned
State Governments/UT Administrations only. However, the fund available in other
related schemes of the State Governments/UTs and assistance aid of MoEF&CC
may also be utilized for meeting the financial liabilities of States/UTs.
3.9 State Governments/UT Administrations may provide requisite information related to
historic crop losses by wild animals etc. to the Insurance Companies and also get
concurrence in the SLCCCI meeting for implementation of add-on cover and mode
to be adopted.
3.10 Eligibility Criteria:
3.10.1 This add-on cover will only be available if this cover is notified by the State
Governments/UT Administrations.
3.10.2 Available to all those insured farmers, at land parcel level, affected by above
mentioned perils in a Notified IU growing notified crops for which insurance under
normal PMFBY has been availed.
3.10.3 Only those farmers would be eligible for financial support under this cover who have
paid the premium for the add-on cover. i.e. the premium has been debited from their
account before the occurrence of the insured peril.
3.10.4 Available for all notified crops which has been declared eligible for the Add-on cover
as per the notification issued by the States/UTs and damaged by Wild Animal attack
during when the crop is in standing condition up till harvesting.
3.10.5 Maximum liability is limited to the Sum Insured value arrived by multiplying indemnity
level with the total Sum Insured of the damaged crop's area and the pay-out under
this provision would be in proportion to the loss incurred on crop due to the
occurrence of the insured peril. The sum insured will be same as notified under
PMFBY. There would not be any additional sum insured for this add-on cover.
3.10.6 The add-on cover will be optional for both the loanee and non-loanee farmers. If a
farmer opts for the cover, he will have to pay notional premium rate. However, the
concerned State Governments/UT Administrations will provide remaining premium
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
170

--- Page 171 ---
as subsidy and/or eligible claims from the corpus fund as per the mode adopted.
3.10.7 Non-loanee farmers will opt for this add-on cover at the time of enrolment and loanee
farmers will inform the concerned Bank branches to opt for this cover in writing at
least 2 working days prior to the prescribed cut-off date of enrolment and debiting of
premium. Provision in this regard shall be made in NCIP for capturing the enrollment
of farmers under the add-on cover, however, State Governments/UT Administrations
and concerned Insurance Companies shall maintain the granular data of insured
farmers under add-on cover.
3.10.8 This add-on cover will be available initially for major crops only.
3.10.9 The State Governments/UT Administrations would notify the list of wild animals,
which inhabit the region & IU and crop-wise which will be covered under this add-on
cover in consultation with state forest department.
3.10.10 The add-on cover would be applicable from 30 days after sowing to harvesting period.
The coverage duration should compulsorily be notified by the State/UT in the
notification also.
3.10.11 Indemnity would be payable only when the area affected by notified wild animals is
more than 25% of the individual insured land parcel, and the affected notified crop
has less than 25% chances of crop revival till harvest. This provision may be reviewed
by the respective implementing States & UTs as per their specific requirements.
3.10.12 If the pay-out under area-approach (based on CCEs data) is more than losses under
this add-on cover, the balance claims, if any, shall be settled at the end of season.
4. Proxy-Indicators:
4.1.1 Incidence of raiding or grazing by wild animal must be substantiated by media reports
or the reports of the agriculture and/or Forest and/or Revenue department. The State
governments/UT Administrations may also consider other reports of damage
including reports of Panchayati Raj or Gram Sabha etc. as intimation and quantity of
loss. However, only damage assessment report based on the joint survey report as
per provisions under clause of the Operational Guidelines applicable for Localized
Claims shall be considered for deciding the extent of crop damage and eligible
claims.
5. Loss Assessment Procedure:
5.1 Time and method of reporting the loss/claims:
A. The State Governments/UT Administrations would notify crop-wise and the agro-
climatic zone. This provision can be invoked during the period while the crop is in
standing position (30 days after crop sowing to harvesting period). In the case of any
event occurring beyond this period, this provision shall not be applicable under any
circumstances.
B. Immediate intimation (within 72 hours) by the insured farmer as detailed in Para
5.2 (Annexure I) below.
C. Intimation must contain details of insured farmer's name, affected survey number-
wise insured crop and acreage affected, Farmer's Application No. as on NCIP, his/her
Mobile Number etc. KCC A/c No. (in case of loanee farmer) or Saving bank Account
(in case of non-Loanee farmer as declared at the time of applying for crop insurance)
for identification and verification purpose.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
171

--- Page 172 ---
D. Premium payment verification to be done from the NCIP and in case of need, may be
verified from the bank. The bank shall provide the payment verification within the next
48 hours of receipt of such request.
E. Mobile application may be used for reporting incidence of localized calamities for
intimation of events including longitude/latitude details and pictures using Mobile
App developed by DA&FW.
5.2 Localized Calamity claim amount at individual farm level shall be calculated as per
the following formula:
𝑨𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒐𝒖𝒕 𝒐𝒇 𝑬𝒔𝒕𝒊𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑪𝒓𝒐𝒑 𝑫𝒂𝒎𝒂𝒈𝒆
𝑆𝒖𝒎 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 × (%) × (%) 𝒙 𝑰𝒏𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒏𝒊𝒕𝒚 𝑳𝒆𝒗𝒆𝒍
𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍 𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒓𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂 𝒊𝒏 𝑨𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝑨𝒓𝒆𝒂
5.3 For estimation of crop loss in the individual farms/land parcels, the digital Crop Loss
Assessment App developed by the GoI shall be compulsorily used by the Insurance
Companies, States/UTs and loss surveyors appointed by the concerned Insurance
Companies.
6. Channel of Reporting i.e. Whom to be Reported:
6.1 Intimation may be given within 72 hours by the farmer either directly through the
"Crop Insurance App" or centralized toll-free number of Krishi Rakshak Portal &
Helpline (14447). The intimation may also be forwarded through the concerned
bank branch, local agriculture department Government/district officials or through
the toll-free number. The first mode of intimation should be the "Crop Insurance App"
and the centralized Toll-Free Number for this purpose. This can be followed by
intimation through the bank or district officials to Insurance Company for conducting
individual level investigations. The concerned bank/intermediary, if asked by the
Insurance Companies, would verify the insured details like crop insured, sum
insured, premium debited and date of debit & remittance and share with the
Insurance Company for conducting the crop loss assessment.
6.2 Reporting of losses will be done through the Crop Insurance App and the Centralized
Toll-Free Number (KRPH), along with other channels. Other Channels will be
phased out subsequently.
6.3 In case the intimation has been given through the concerned bank branch or
State/UT Government officials, the same shall be forwarded by the Bank Branches
or Govt. officials of the concerned Insurance Company within the next 48 hours
through available channels or Krishi Rakshak Portal & Helpline.
7. Documentary Evidence Required for Claim Assessment:
7.1 Duly filled crop loss intimation through the Crop Insurance App or Krishi Rakshak
Portal & Helpline, or other mentioned channels, along with all relevant documents is
necessary for initiation of loss assessment and payment of claims. However, if
information on all the columns is not readily available, partial information may be
sent to the Insurance Company and later within 7 days of the loss, the complete
details may be submitted.
7.2 The Insurance Companies are responsible for ensuring that sufficient number of loss
intimation forms are available at the bank branch, local Government officials level.
Any other additional documents can be collected directly from the farmer at the time
of loss assessment by the representative/surveyor of the Insurance Company.
Insurance Company shall complete all formalities and collect any ancillary
information required for the payment of such claims, like local newspaper cutting
and any other available evidence to substantiate the occurrence of loss event and
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
172

--- Page 173 ---
severity of the loss, if any.
8. Appointment of Loss Assessors by the Insurance Company:
8.1 The loss assessors would be appointed by the Insurance Company for assessment
of losses due to incidence of Localized Calamities. The loss assessors appointed by
the Insurance Companies should be in accordance with the IRDAI provisions. The
loss assessors appointed should possess following experience and qualification:
• Diploma/degree in any subject with minimum 2 years relevant experience or
bachelor’s degree in agriculture and allied subjects with one year experience.
• Retired Government officials of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Extension Department
having Diploma/B.Sc(Ag.) degree.
• Retired Bank officials with experience of agriculture value chain financing or Kisan
Credit Card (KCC).
8.2 For compliance under the above provisions the Insurance Companies would utilize
the empaneled loss assessors for using their services as and when required.
8.3 The loss would be jointly assessed by a team comprising of loss assessors
appointed by the insurer, block level agriculture officer, primary worker of the
agriculture or revenue department and the concerned farmer. Loss assessment
surveys shall be conducted by the Joint Committee, at each individual field level,
through the Mobile App specifically developed for the same by the GoI. The loss
assessment data shall be uploaded on the NCIP on a real time basis to arrive at the
Claim amount of the eligible insured farmers.
9. Time Frame for Loss Assessment and Claims Payment:
A. Appointment of loss assessor within 48 hours
B. Loss assessment to be done only after lapse of minimum 7 days (for assessing the
chances of revival) and must be completed within next 14 days of the receipt of
information of loss.
C. Claim settlement/payment to the farmers to be completed in next 1 days (subject to
receipt of premium).
D. Maximum liability is limited to the maximum or balance Sum Insured of the damaged
crop’s area and the pay-out under this provision would be in proportion to the total
loss incurred on the crop in the insured plot, up to the occurrence of the insured peril.
E. Claims under this cover would be paid as per the modalities defined in Para 21.7
“Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of similar or different Perils” by considering
Wild Animal Attack similar to a Localized calamity.
F. If the loss due to add-on cover happens mid-season, claim for the same should
be paid to the farmer first by the Insurance Company or through the corpus as the
case may be. In case the add-on cover is implemented through corpus fund, the
Insurance Company implementing PMFBY shall be replenished by the corpus
fund for the additional claim liability under Add-on cover after payment of eligible
claims under normal PMFBY.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
173

--- Page 174 ---
ANNEXURE - II
Format for reporting of excess area insured/ acreage discrepancy for consideration of
application of area correction factor by Insurance Company
(All areas in Hectare)
Details available at Notified Insurance Unit Level or Block/Taluka Level (If sown area not
available at IU level)
Area sown during
Total
the season for last
Insure
Name of three years (at
d areas
lowest lowest available unit
under
unit Total of area) under
Net all
areas at Geogr reported crop
Cultivab notifie
which aphic
le/sown d Name
sown al
area at crops of
area Area
the at Insured
Block data is at the
District IU lowest lowest Crop#
availabl lowest Year 3 Year 2 Year 1
unit unit
e unit
level areas
area
A B C D E F G H I J K L
1
(All areas in Hectare)
Details available at Notified Insurance Unit Level or Block/Taluka Level
(If sown area not available at IU level)
Insured area during % %
Insured area of last two previous current season Exces Excess
Sown
seasons/years (at same level of Unit) (at same level of Unit) s of of Area
Area
under the reported crop under reported crop Area Insure
during
Insure d
Maxi- curren Year 2 Year 1
d over
mum t year
over max
of (If
max insure
Last availa
sown d areas
Thre ble) at
Non- Non- Loa- Non- areas at Col.
e same Loa- Loa- Tota
Loan Total Loan Total nee Loanee at Col. Q
Year unit nee nee l
ee ee (M) or T
s level
M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
# details of each insured crops are reported separately in separate column
Deduplication measures / work to be done by insurance company before reporting of
aforesaid format as mentioned in revised operational guidelines:
Outcome: List of Activities carried out and No. of applications eliminated
I. Aadhaar Based De-duplication
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
174

--- Page 175 ---
II. Land Record De-duplication
III. Bank Records / Loanee Verification / De-duplication
IV. Insurance Intermediary/CSC Applications Processing / Deduplication
V. Communication with Banks Branch excess insured area
VI. Irregularities / Anomalies reported to State Governments/UT Administrations and Action
taken by them
VII. View / Consent of State Governments/UT Administrations, If any
VIII. Any other activities for De-duplication
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
175

--- Page 176 ---
ANNEXURE- III
Illustration for classification of risks, clubbing / clustering of risks and Districts and
determination of L1 bidder:
Method 1
Define Risk Level
i. Calculate Loss Cost for each district as per illustration given for District
1, Notified Insurance Unit 1 (NIU1) and Crop1, on the basis of immediate past
ten years of yield data:
Year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Average TY (Kg/Ha)
Yield 2387 2558 1800 2097 2503 1500 2855 2734 1200 2987 2311 2041
LC (%) 0% 0% 12% 0% 0% 27% 0% 0% 41% 0% 8%
Weighted Average Loss Cost (%) of District 1 = 7,85,000 / 1,00,50,000 = 7.80%
ii. List the districts with their loss cost (%):
Last year Sum Average Expected
District NIU Weight (ESI)
Crop Area Insured Insured Loss Claim
Name Name in Rs.
(In Ha) (Rs./ha) Cost Amount
A B C D F=D*E G
District 1 NIU1 Crop1 400 40,00,000
District 1 NIU1 Crop2 300 12,00,000
District 1 NIU2 Crop1 200 20,00,000
District 1 NIU2 Crop2 150 6,00,000
District 1 NIU3 Crop1 125 12,50,000
District 1 NIU3 Crop2 250 10,00,000
Total 1,00,50,000
Sl. No. District Name District Loss Cost
1 District 1 7.80%
2 District 2 8.60%
3 District 3 5.40%
4 District 4 3.20%
5 District 5 4.60%
Low District Loss Cost< 1/3 percentile value
Medium District Loss Cost>= 1/3 and < 2/3 percentile values
High Loss Cost>= 2/3 percentile value
1/3 percentile value 4.87% = PERCENTILE(district Loss
Cost,1/3)
2/3 percentile value 7.01% = PERCENTILE(district Loss
Cost,2/3)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
176

--- Page 177 ---
iii. Define Coverage Level:
a) Estimation of the Area Insured (in ha): The area insured for the ensuing season
would be based on the previous year area insured. However, as per best judgment
and concurrent situation, States may adjust estimated area insured by +/- 10% of
previous year area insured.
b) Estimated area insured as per (a) above for current season-year will be multiplied
with sum insured (Rs./ha) to arrive the Expected Sum Insured (in Rs.) for each and
every district-crop combination. The district level Expected Sum Insured (ESI) will be
the total of each district-crop combination within the districts.
Example given for District 1:
District Crop Estimated Sum Expected
Name Area Insured Sum
Insured (in (Rs./ha) Insured (in
Ha) Rs.)
A B C D E=C*D
District 1 Crop1 725 10,000 72,50,000
District 1 Crop2 700 4,000 28,00,000
District 1 Expected Sum Insured (in Rs.) 1,00,50,000
In the similar manner calculate Expected Sum Insured (ESI) in Rs. for all the districts.
c) Calculate1/3 and 2/3 Percentile values of Expected Sum Insured (ESI) for entire
district within State. Define Coverage Level as per following percentile values:
Low District ESI < 1/3 percentile value
Medium District ESI >= 1/3 and < 2/3 percentile values
High District ESI >= 2/3 percentile value
1/3 percentile value 3500000 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 1/3)
2/3 percentile value 8833333 = PERCENTILE(District ESI, 2/3)
District Name Expected Sum Insured (in Rs) Coverage Level
District 1 1,00,50,000 High
District 2 90,00,000 High
District 3 85,00,000 Medium
District 4 10,00,000 Low
District 5 7,00,000 Low
Risk Level Coverage Level Code
High Risk High Coverage 1
Medium Risk High Coverage 2
Low Risk High Coverage 3
High Risk Medium Coverage 4
Medium Risk Medium Coverage 5
Medium Risk Low Coverage 8
Low Risk Low Coverage 9
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
177

--- Page 178 ---
d) Allocation of codes to different districts:
• Arrange the districts in any order.
• Write risk level and coverage level corresponding to each district.
• On the basis on above code table allot codes to each district.
• Arrange the districts in ascending order of allotted codes.
• Write ESI against each district in next column and arrange ESI in descending order
of the district within the same code.
Illustration:
District Expected Sum Coverage
Risk Level Code
Name Insured (in Rs.) Level
District 1 1,00,50,000 High Risk High 1
District 2 90,00,000 High Risk High 1
District 3 85,00,000 Medium Risk Medium 5
District 4 10,00,000 Low Risk Low 9
Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3
District ESI (in Rs) District ESI (in Rs) District ESI (in Rs)
Name Name Name
District 1 1,00,50,000 District 2 90,00,000 District 3 85,00,000
District 4 7,00,000 District 5 10,00,000
Total 1,00,50,000 97,00,000 95,00,000
For other codes, the distribution may be done to achieve balancing of ESI.
e) Make suitable minor changes in the distribution of districts to clusters for
achieving the objective of clustering.
Applicable conditions for Clustering/Clubbing of districts:
i. Within the cluster, Insurance Companies would be required to quote the premium
rates for all district-crop combination for their bids to be evaluated.
ii. Company not quoting even for one of the total district-crop combinations within the
cluster would be disqualified from the bidding period.
iii. There would be no further negotiations with the L1 bidder to accept L1 rates of other
bidder for any district crop combination i.e. the rates quoted by the L1 bidder for
different district-crop combination would be applicable within the cluster. Bidding and
negotiation conditions will be as per Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines
rd
vide its circular nos. No.005/CRD/012 dated 03 March 2007 & No.005/CRD/012
th
dated 20 Jan 2010.
iv. L1 bidder shall not be permitted to surrender partial clusters/districts. If any company
declines after being declared L1, the company may be barred to implement crop
insurance scheme for the coming 1 season in the concerned State and the L2 may be
given the cluster for implementing the crop insurance scheme at L1 district-crop
combination rates and soon to L3, L4 bidder as per the consent of insurance company.
Such bidders will be required to furnish appropriate reasons for withdrawal/surrender
in writing to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India within
10 days from opening of the bids to enable further corrective measures and
appropriate administrative & legal action against defaulting bidders.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
178

--- Page 179 ---
Selection of Implementing Agency: Illustration:
Weighted Premium Rate (%) for companies
Company X Company X Company X
0.044289 0.046435 0.044221
4.43% 4.64% 4.42%
L1 in Cluster1 is Company Z. Similar process would be followed other clusters.
Method 2
Agriculture output in the area/ district is influenced by the agro-climatic conditions of
that area/district. On the basis of the variation in agriculture output (crops) in each
district during the last 10 years, districts may be divided into three categories of low,
moderate and high risks to agriculture. If variation in agriculture output in the district
during the last 10 years worked out to be plus minus<15% then district may be
categorized as low risk. Similarly, districts of variation ranging plus minus 16-30%
may be categorized of moderate risks and variation of plus minus >30% as high
risks districts to agriculture operations. Accordingly, all districts of the State would
be identified as low/moderate/high risk. Number of clusters to be formed shall be
decided according to total no. of districts in the State. Total no. of each category of
low, moderate and high risks districts shall be divided by no. of clusters to be formed
in the State. Then, equal no. of low-risk districts shall be selected randomly for each
cluster of districts. Similarly, moderate and high risks districts would be selected.
Example:
State- UP, No. of districts - 75
Based on the last 10 years variation in output, category-wise No. of districts identified:
Low risks 40, Moderate risks 20, High risks 15,
No. of clusters (of preferably 15-20 districts each) to be formed: 75/19 =3.95 say 4
Then, no. of low risks districts in each cluster: 40/4 = 10
Similarly, moderate risks districts: 20/4=5 and high risks districts:15/4=3.75 say 4 as such
Sample calculation to find L1:
Table - 1: Calculation to arrive company's weighted average premium in a district of the
cluster
Formation of clusters
No. of
No of Low No. of Total
Cluster moderate
Risk high risks districts
risks
Districts districts in cluster
districts
C1 10 5 4 19
C2 10 5 4 19
C3 10 5 4 19
C4 10 5 3 18
District: D1 Company –Y
Crops Notified Expecte Notifi Total SI Premiu
Premium
in a District of d Area to ed SI (Rs. m
Amount
the Cluster be per Lakh) Quoted
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
179

--- Page 180 ---
insured ha by (Rs. Lakh)
(in ha) (Rs.) compa X (% of SI)
ny
Paddy 10,000 30,000 3,000 5 150
Maize 6,000 20,000 1,200 10 120
Cotton 8,000 35,000 2,800 12 336
Arhar 9,000 50,000 4,500 15 675
Groundnut 5,000 40,000 2,000 13 260
Above all crops 38,000 13,500 1,541
District: D1 Company –Z
Premiu
Expecte Notifi
m Premium
Crops Notified d Area to ed SI Total SI
Quoted Amount
in a District of be per (Rs.
by (Rs. Lakh)
the Cluster insured ha Lakh)
compa X (% of SI)
(in ha) (Rs.)
ny
Paddy 10,000 30,000 3,000 7 210
Maize 6,000 20,000 1,200 9 108
Cotton 8,000 35,000 2,800 11 308
Arhar 9,000 50,000 4,500 15 675
Groundnut 5,000 40,000 2,000 14 280
Above all crops 38,000 13,500 1,581
Table - 2: Calculation to arrive at company's weighted average premium in a cluster of
districts
For Company: X
Weighted
Expected Premium
Total SI average
Districts of Area to be Amount
(Rs. Premium of
the Cluster insured (Rs.
Lakh) company X(% of
(in ha) Lakh)
SI)
District D1 38,000 13,500 1,541
District D2 40,000 14,000 1,600
District D3 35,000 13,000 1,400
District D4 45,000 15,000 1,650
District D5 30,000 12,750 1,350
Above all
1,88,000 68,250 7,541 11.05
Districts
For Company: Y
Weighted
Expected Premium
Total SI average
Districts of Area to be Amount
(Rs. Premium of
the Cluster insured (Rs.
Lakh) company X(% of
(in ha) Lakh)
SI)
District D1 38,000 13,500 1,446
District D2 40,000 14,000 1,500
District D3 35,000 13,000 1,425
District D4 45,000 15,000 1,675
District D5 30,000 12,750 1,400
Above all
1,88,000 68,250 7,446 10.91
Districts
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
180

--- Page 181 ---
For Company: Z
Weighted
Expected Premium
Total SI average
Districts of Area to be Amount
(Rs. Premium of
the Cluster insured (Rs.
Lakh) company X(% of
(in ha) Lakh)
SI)
District D1 38,000 13,500 1,581
District D2 40,000 14,000 1,550
District D3 35,000 13,000 1,475
District D4 45,000 15,000 1,600
District D5 30,000 12,750 1,275
Above all
1,88,000 68,250 7,481 10.91
Districts
The company of the lowest weighted average premium in the cluster will be selected
as L1. Hence, company Y qualifies for L1 in the cluster of 5 districts and likewise for
other clusters and companies.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
181

--- Page 182 ---
ANNEXURE- IV
Checklist for STAC while disposing-off Yield Disputes under PMFBY and for referring
case to Central TAC
Time limit
If Yes-
for
then give
notification/
date and
appeal/
attach as
SN Particular (Yes/No) Report as
Annexure,
per
If No-
Operational
reason
Guidelines
thereof
2023
Issuance of Notification of
1 prevented Sowing/Mid-season
Adversity/ Post-harvest losses
Joint survey conducted for
2 prevented Sowing/Mid-season
Adversity/Post-harvest losses
Sharing of CCE Yield Data with
3
Isurance Company
Objection of Insurance Company
against Notification of prevented
Sowing/Mid-season
4
Adversity/Wide Spread
localized/Post-Harvest losses or
CCE Yield data
Appeal of Insurance Company in
5
DLMC
6 Meeting of DLMC
Objection of Insurance Company
7
on DLMC decision
Appeal of Insurance Company to
8
Division level
Meeting of Division level
9
committee
Appeal of Insurance Company for
10
STAC
STAC meeting
Whether the Triggers
A for MSA/Yield Dispute
have been validated?
Whether Remote
B Sensing based report
11 has been prepared?
Whether Weather
C data report has been
considered?
Whether State
D implementing YES-
TECH?
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
182

--- Page 183 ---
If Yes- Inception
Report/Mid-Season
report/Final
Report/Special Report
submitted by TIP to
be attached
Whether these RST, Weather and
YES-TECH reports have been
12
considered by the STAC while
deciding the dispute?
Insurance Company appeal for
13
TAC
Triggers for MSA & Yield Disputes under MSA
i. Disputes under MSA:
Actions required to be validated by STAC Definitions
After 1 month from onset of sowing and before 15 days Definitions & interpretations
from the onset of harvest time, fulfilment of eligibility of regarding proxy indicators
On-Account payment (i.e. 50% yield loss in standing would be applied as per IMD's
crops to be compared with Normal yield in notified guidelines as below.
insurance unit area as explained in Para 21.4.2.2) is to %age w.r.t. LPA Abnormal
be decided based on occurrence of any one of the proxy Weather Parameter: (±) 20 or
Indicators occurring along with other proxy indicators of: more deviation than the LPA.
Severe Drought Condition, as defined in the Drought Definitions & interpretations
Manual, 2016. regarding proxy indicators for
Dry spells and drought declared by State/ UT. drought would be applied as
Abnormally Low / High temperature in comparison to per Drought Manual 2016, i.e.
LPA>20% deviation. 1. Rainfall Index: Dry Spell: 3-
Abnormally Low / High rainfall in comparison to LPA > 4 weeks with <50% of Normal
20% deviation. RF
Widespread incidences of Insect, Pest & Diseases Rainfall Deviation: < -20% of
impacting > 25% crop sown Area*. Normal Rainfall (RF).
Any other defined natural event including flooding which 2. Remote Sensing: NDVI/
may lead to widespread losses impacting > 25% crop NDWI deviation: < -20%-30%
sown area*. VCI Value--0-40%.
Supported by Satellite Image and Satellite Index based 3. Crop Sowing: Area Under
outputs to be provided by ISRO/SAC, MNCFC or MITR’s Sowing: Kharif < 33.3%, Rabi <
under YES-TECH, Government crop condition reports, 50% of crop-wise normal Sown
and Media reports etc. Area*.
Further, with reference to procedural disputes on loss 4. Soil Moisture: PASM)/ MAI -
surveys, STAC also needs to verify that there is sufficient - 0%-75%.
documentary evidence that the mid-season yield 5. Hydrology:
assessment have not been conducted in the required RSI --> 20%
numbers and as per the standard protocol, in at least GWDI --> 0.16%
20% IUs for a particular crop in a given district or 20% of SFDI --> 0.01.
total planned loss assessment surveys for the particular
crop in the given district. The concerned State Govt./UT
and/or TIP may provide the
relevant data to STAC for
consideration.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
183

--- Page 184 ---
ii. Disputes under Final Yield (AY):
Actions required to be validated by STAC Data Requirements
Any dispute related to Final Yield (AY Values) being Data to be provided by
referred to STAC by Insuranec Companies of DLJC, State/UT Government &/or
DGRC or SGRC shall be validated against the below TIP:
parameters to ensure that the dispute qualifies to be
considered at STAC level: All yield assessment survey or
There is more than 25% difference between the yield CCE data of the contested
estimated by the State/UT Government and the area, in digital format,
Insurance Company. (preferably Excel), along with
photographs and other
There is sufficient documentary evidence that the CCEs collateral data, as collected
have not been conducted in the required numbers and as during yield assessment
per the standard protocol, in at least 20% IUs for a survey or CCEs. The yield
particular crop in a given district or 20% of total planned assessment survey or CCE
CCEs for the particular crop in the given district. data should ideally be geo
referenced.
The matter has been considered by DGRC and/or SGRC Village level crop area
but could not be resolved at those levels. estimates.
The Insurance Company has already carried out the Long term (at least 10 years)
technical analysis of the data in consultation of the State data of crop yield at GP level (if
Government/UT Administration or in collaboration with not available, at least at
Central/State/empaneled agencies and has used Taluka/block level) in digital
satellite/model/ weather data to support its objection. format, (preferably Excel).
Long term (at least 10 years)
data of weather parameters
(daily or weekly) at GP level (if
not available, at least at Taluka
/block level). The weather
parameters should cover at
least, rainfall, rainy days and
temperature, in digital format,
(preferably Excel).
Any information about
pest/disease attack, hailstorm,
cyclones, inundations, heavy
rainfall or any other natural/
manmade disasters in that
area.
Report of any analysis carried
out by the State/UT to support
its claim.
Data to be provided by
Insurance Company:
Data of the co-observed yield
assessment survey or CCEs
collected by Insurance
Comapnies in digital format,
(preferably Excel), along with
photographs and other
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
184

--- Page 185 ---
collateral data, as collected
during yield assessment
survey or CCE.
Data of weather
observatories*, if maintained or
sourced by Insurance
Company, in the contested
area.
Report of the technical studies*
carried out by the Insurance
Company to support its claim.
Detailed reasons for the yield
data being perceived as
contested.
Any UAV data/output collected
from the contested area.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
185

--- Page 186 ---
ANNEXURE- V
Illustration of Modalities of Claim Settlement under Multiple Events of similar or
different Perils at same land-parcel & Crop under PMFBY
Scenarios Clarifications/Remarks
1. Claim due to Preventive Sowing/Failed Germination only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
B
the next level in case of change of type of
(Preve
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters ntive
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
Sowin
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
g)
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Preventive Sowing/
Failed Germination Crop Loss %age as per IU level crop Loss
Preventi
Area %age in an IU 80% Assessment
ve
Preventive
Sowing/
Sowing/Failed A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying Sum Insured value
Failed
Germination claims 12,500 and %age of crop loss assessed
Germin
Claim amount arrived is paid and insurance
ation
Payable Localized c o v e r c e a s e s f o r the affected crop in the
claims (A) 12,500 notified IU
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized
Claims (Rs.) - Insurance Cover Cease to exist
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest
(Rs.) - Insurance Cover Cease to exist
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield
Loss (Rs.) - Insurance Cover Cease to exist
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l n o t r educe and shall
Claims (Rs.) - remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e w i ll be reduced by
Insured for Mid - Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
186

--- Page 187 ---
Term/Post-Harvest
(Rs.)
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e w i ll be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) - Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 0% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Midter
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
m Claim
Mid-term Claim - mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l b e r e duced by net
Claims (Rs.) - paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l b e r e duced by net
Harvest (Rs.) - paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o s s % age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) - reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 0% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y l o c alized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) - paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e w i ll reduced by Amount
Harvest (Rs.) - of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e w i ll reduced by Amount
Loss (Rs.) - of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) - Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 0% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Post
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Harvest
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of localized post-
Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
187

--- Page 188 ---
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) - Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y a m o unt of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) - Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 0% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim - Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i t h M id Term Claims &
Claim (F) - Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 12,500 Gross Total of D, E & F
2. Claim due to Yield Loss only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
the next level in case of change of type of
B
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters (Yield
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
Loss)
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
Midter
%age 0% Indemnity Level
m Claim
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
Mid-term Claim - mid-term claim
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
188

--- Page 189 ---
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 0% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) - Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 0% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) - Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 20% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 10,000 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w ith Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 10,000 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 10,000 Gross Total of D, E & F
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
189

--- Page 190 ---
3. Claim due to Mid-Season Adversity & Yield Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
B (Mid
the next level in case of change of type of
Term
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters +
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
Yield
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Loss)
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 60% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 15% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Midter
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss under
m Claim
Mid-Term Claim 7,500 mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e peril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) 7,500 or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 42,500 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 42,500 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
190

--- Page 191 ---
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 0% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 42,500 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 42,500 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 7,500 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 0% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) - Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 30% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 15,000 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i th Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 7,500 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 15,000 Gross Total of D, E & F
4. Claim due to Yield Loss & Post-Harvest Loss only
Remarks/Notes
B
(Post (Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
Name of Harves the next level in case of change of type of
Parameters
Perils t + Peril/Event, Within the identical
Yield peril/event, differential claim amount will
Loss) be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
191

--- Page 192 ---
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 0% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Midter
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
m Claim
Mid-Term Claim - mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localize Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
d Claim %age 0% %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
192

--- Page 193 ---
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) - Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 70% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim 35,000 harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age
Payable Post a t I n d i v i d u a l f a r m level with available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) 35,000 Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 15,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 20% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 3,000 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i th Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 3,000 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 38,000 Gross Total of D, E & F
5. Claims due to Localized Loss & Yield Loss only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
B
the next level in case of change of type of
(Locali
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters zed +
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
Yield
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Loss)
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localize Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
d Claim %age 10% Loss Assessment
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
193

--- Page 194 ---
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying Sum Insured value
Localized claims 5,000 and %age of payable localized loss
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
claims (A) 5,000 already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 0% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Midter
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
m Claim
Mid-Term Claim - mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 45,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 0% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Harvest (Rs.) 45,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
194

--- Page 195 ---
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 5,000 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 0% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) - Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 15% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 6,750 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i th Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 6,750 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 11,750 Gross Total of D, E & F
6. Claims due to Localized Loss & Post Harvest Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
B (Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
(Locali the next level in case of change of type of
Name of zed + Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters
Perils Post peril/event, differential claim amount will
Harves be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
t) Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Insured for Mid 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
195

--- Page 196 ---
Term/Post-Harvest
(Rs.)
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 0% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Midter
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
m Claim
Mid-Term Claim - mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 15% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e vel with available Sum
Localized claims 7,500 Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
Localized claims (C) 7,500 already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 42,500 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 42,500 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 7,500 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 75% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Post
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Harvest
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of localized post-
Post Harvest Claim 31,875 harvest loss %age
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
196

--- Page 197 ---
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l evel with available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) 31,875 Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 10,625 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 0% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim - Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i t h M id Term Claims &
Claim (F) - Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 39,375 Gross Total of D, E & F
7. Claims due to Two Localized Losses Only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
B
the next level in case of change of type of
(Locali
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters zed +
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
Localiz
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
ed)
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 10% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims 5,000 and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
claims (A) 5,000 already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Midter Estimated AY Loss 0% >50% of Normal Yield,
m Claim Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 0% Indemnity Level
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
197

--- Page 198 ---
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of crop loss under
Mid-Term Claim - mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e p e ril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) - or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 45,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 20% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e vel with available Sum
Localized claims 5,000 Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
Localized claims (C) 5,000 already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Harvest (Rs.) 40,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will reduced by Amount
Loss (Rs.) 40,000 of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 10,000 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 0% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a ge of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) - Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 40,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 0% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim - Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i t h M id Term Claims &
Claim (F) - Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
198

--- Page 199 ---
Gross Total Payable
Claim 10,000 Gross Total of D, E & F
8. Claims due to Mid-Term Loss, Yield Loss & Post Harvest Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
B (Mid
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
Term
the next level in case of change of type of
+ Post
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters Harves
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
t +
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Yield
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
Loss)
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 0% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims - and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
claims (A) - already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 60% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 15% Indemnity Level
Mid- Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
term I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss under
Claim Mid-Term Claim 7,500 mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e peril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) 7,500 or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 42,500 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 42,500 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
199

--- Page 200 ---
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 0% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 42,500 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 42,500 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 7,500 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 80% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim 34,000 harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l evel with available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) 34,000 Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 16,000 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 60% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 9,600 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i th Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 2,100 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 43,600 Gross Total of D, E & F
9. Claims due to Localised Loss, Mid Season Adversity, Yield Loss &
Post Harvest Loss Only
B Remarks/Notes
(Locali
Name of
Parameters zed + (Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
Perils
Mid the next level in case of change of type of
Term Peril/Event, Within the identical
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
200

--- Page 201 ---
+ peril/event, differential claim amount will
Localiz be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
ed + Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
Post claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Harves Loss claims)
t +
Yield
Loss)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 10% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims 5,000 and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
claims (A) 5,000 already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 60% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age 15% Indemnity Level
Mid- Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
term I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss under
Claim Mid-Term Claim 6,750 mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e peril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) 6,750 or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 43,250 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 38,250 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
Localize
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
d Claim
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 75% %age
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
201

--- Page 202 ---
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l evel with available Sum
Localized claims 32,438 Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s claim after adjusting
Localized claims (C) 27,438 already paid localized claim
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 43,250 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 10,813 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 17,563 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 39,188 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 70% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim 7,569 harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e vel with available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) 7,569 Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 9,994 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 60% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 5,996 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i t h M id Term Claims &
Claim (F) - Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 46,756 Gross Total of D, E & F
10. Claims due to Localized, Mid-Term Loss, Localized Loss, Yield Loss
& Post Harvest Loss Only
B
(Locali
Remarks/Notes
zed +
Mid
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
Term
the next level in case of change of type of
+
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters Localiz
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount will
ed +
be paid without reducing the Sum Insured.
Post
Only MSA claim and wide-spread localized
Harves
claims will be adjusted with final Yield Loss
t +
claims)
Yield
Loss)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
202

--- Page 203 ---
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Loss Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm level
%age 10% Loss Assessment
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t iplying Sum Insured value
Localize
Localized claims 5,000 and %age of payable localized loss
d Claim
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Payable Localized % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after adjusting
claims (A) 5,000 already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
Claims (Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for Mid
Term/Post-Harvest S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
(Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss %age) to be
Estimated AY Loss 50% >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim Loss 25% of Estimated Claims based on
%age (25% payable) 13% Indemnity Level
Mid- Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
term I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss under
Claim Mid-Term Claim 5,625 mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e peril is same, i.e. WSL
Midterm Claim (B) 5,625 or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for Localized S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Claims (Rs.) 44,375 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 39,375 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no wide
Insured for Yield a r e a - a p p r o a c h l o ss %age shall lead to
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims Loss or WSL loss & previous localized Crop loss
%age 10% %age
Localize
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
d Claim
I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l w ith available Sum
Localized claims - Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of loss
Net Payable % a g e p a y a b l e a s c l a i m after adjusting
Localized claims (C) - already paid localized claim
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
203

--- Page 204 ---
Sum Insured value remains identical after
Residual Sum invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age and will
Insured for Localized n o t b e r e d u c e d b y localized claim amount
Claims (Rs.) 44,375 paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 39,375 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 45,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 10,625 Sub total of A, B & C
Post Harvest Loss Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm Level
%age 15% loss of crop in Cut & Spread condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of localized post-
Harvest Post Harvest Claim 5,906 harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age at
Payable Post I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e vel with available Sum
Harvest Claim (E) 5,906 Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized and
Loss (Rs.) 39,094 Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 30% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 11,728 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w i th Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 6,103 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 22,634 Gross Total of D, E & F
11. Claims due to Wide-Spread Localised Loss, Yield Loss & Post
Harvest Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce for
B (Wide-
the next level in case of change of type of
Spread
Name of Peril/Event, Within the identical
Parameters Localized
Perils peril/event, differential claim amount
+ Yield
will be paid without reducing the Sum
Loss)
Insured. Only MSA claim and wide-
spread localized claims will be adjusted
with final Yield Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm
Localized Loss %age 0% level Loss Assessment
Claim A r r i v e d a f t e r m u l t i p l y ing Sum Insured
Localized claims - value and %age of payable localized loss
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
204

--- Page 205 ---
At subsequent localized claim, max. of
Payable Localized l o s s % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after
claims (A) - adjusting already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
(Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum
Insured for S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Estimated Wide-
Spread Loss on Estimated Crop Loss turns to WSL Loss if
Sample Survey 65% affected area > 25% of Insured area
Wide-Spread Claim 25% of Estimated Claims based on
Wide- Loss %age 16% sample survey of crop loss
Spread Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Localized Widespread I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss
Claim Localized Claim 8,125 under mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims under
any other peril doesn’t get adjusted, but
Net Payable Mid- g e t s a d j u s t e d i f t h e peril is same, i.e. WSL
term Claim (B) 8,125 or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
(Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same,
Residual Sum subsequent claims on area-approach
Insured for s h a l l b e a d j u s t e d with paid/payable
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 claims
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Residual Sum Sum Insured will remain same and no
Insured for Yield w i d e a r e a - a p p r o ach loss %age shall lead
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 to reduction in Sum Insured value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than the
total of estimated crop loss %age at MSA
Localized Claims or WSL loss & previous localized Crop
Loss %age 0% loss %age
Localized
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age
Claim
a t I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l with available
Localized claims - Sum Insured value for the peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of
Net Payable l o s s % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after
Localized claims (C) - adjusting already paid localized claim
Residual Sum S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e remains identical
Insured for 41,875 after invocation of WSL/MSA loss %age
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
205

--- Page 206 ---
Localized Claims and will not be reduced by localized
(Rs.) claim amount paid
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Harvest (Rs.) 41,875 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Yield S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e will be reduced by
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Amount of Localized claims paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 8,125 Sub total of A, B & C
Based on Crop loss assessed at Farm
Post Harvest Loss Level loss of crop in Cut & Spread
%age 0% condition
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Post
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a g e of localized post-
Harvest
Post Harvest Claim - harvest loss %age
Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss %age
Payable Post a t I n d i v i d u a l f a r m l e v e l with available
Harvest Claim (E) - Sum Insured Value for the peril
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be as per Notified
Insured for Yield V a l u e r e d u c e d b y amount of Localized
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 and Post Harvest claim paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 40% As per yield loss based on AY value
Yield A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying residual Sum
Based Eligible Yield Claim 20,000 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Claim Net Payable Yield T o b e a d j u s t e d w ith Mid Term Claims &
Claim (F) 11,875 Wide-Spread localized claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 20,000 Gross Total of D, E & F
12. Claims due to Wide-Spread Localised Loss, Yield Loss &
Widespread Post Harvest Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
B (Wide- (Special Note: Sum Inured will reduce
Spread for the next level in case of change of
Localized + type of Peril/Event, Within the
Name of
Parameters Widespread identical peril/event, differential
Perils
Post claim amount will be paid without
Harvest + reducing the Sum Insured. Only MSA
Yield Loss) claim and wide-spread localized
claims will be adjusted with final Yield
Loss claims)
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Crop Loss %age as per Individual farm
Loss %age 0% level Loss Assessment
Localized
Arrived after multiplying Sum Insured
Claim
v a l u e a n d % a g e o f p a y able localized
Localized claims - loss
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
206

--- Page 207 ---
At subsequent localized claim, max. of
Payable Localized l o s s % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after
claims (A) - adjusting already paid localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l not reduce and shall
(Rs.) 50,000 remain same as per Notified Value
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for Post- A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for Yield A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Estimated Wide-
Spread Loss on Estimated Crop Loss turns to WSL Loss
Sample Survey 65% if affected area > 25% of Insured area
Wide-Spread Claim 25% of Estimated Claims based on
Wide- Loss %age 16% sample survey of crop loss
Spread Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Localized Widespread I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss
Claim Localized Claim 8,125 under WSL claim
At this stage previously paid claims
under any other peril doesn’t get
Net Payable WSL a d j u s t e d , b u t g e t s adjusted if the peril
Claim (B) 8,125 is same, i.e. WSL or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
(Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same,
Residual Sum subsequent claims on area-approach
Insured for s h a l l b e a d j u s t e d with paid/payable
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 claims
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same and no
Residual Sum wide area-approach loss %age shall
Insured for Yield l e a d t o r e d u c t i o n in Sum Insured
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 value
This shall be triggered only if Crop loss
assessed at Farm Level is higher than
the total of estimated crop loss %age
Localized Claims at MSA or WSL loss & previous
Loss %age 0% localized Crop loss %age
Localized Arrived after multiplying Crop Loss
Claim %age at Individual farm level with
a v a i l a b l e S u m I n s u r e d value for the
Localized claims - peril
At subsequent localized claim, max. of
Net Payable l o s s % a g e p a y a b l e a s c laim after
Localized claims (C) - adjusting already paid localized claim
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
207

--- Page 208 ---
Residual Sum Sum Insured value remains identical
Insured for after invocation of WSL/MSA loss
Localized Claims % a g e a n d w i l l n o t be reduced by
(Rs.) 41,875 localized claim amount paid
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Harvest/WSPHL A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
(Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for Yield A m o u n t o f L o c a l ized claims
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 8,125 Sub total of A, B & C
Estimated Wide- Estimated Crop Loss turns to WSPH
Spread Loss on Loss if affected area > 25% of Insured
Sample Survey 30% area
Wide
Wide-Spread Claim
Spread
Loss %age 8%
Post
Wide-Spread Post 1 0 0 % o f E s t i m a t e d Claims based on
Harvest
Harvest Claim 3,141 sample survey of crop loss
Loss
Arrived after multiplying residual Sum
Payable WSL Post I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d %age of crop loss
Harvest Claim (E) 3,141 under WSPH claim
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced by
Insured for Yield A m o u n t o f W S L P ost Harvest claims
Loss (Rs.) 46,859 paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 40% As per yield loss based on AY value
A r r i v e d a f t e r m u ltiplying residual Sum
Yield
Eligible Yield Claim 18,744 Insured value and %age of yield loss
Based
To be adjusted with Mid Term Claims
Claim
Net Payable Yield & W i d e - S p r e a d l ocalized claim already
Claim (F) 10,619 paid/payable
Gross Total Payable
Claim 21,884 Gross Total of D, E & F
13. Claims due to Wide-Spread Localised Loss, Mid-term Loss, Yield
Loss & Widespread Post Harvest Loss Only
Remarks/Notes
(Special Note: Sum Inured will
B (Wide-
reduce for the next level in case of
Spread
change of type of Peril/Event,
Localized +
Name of Within the identical peril/event,
Parameters Widespread
Perils differential claim amount will be
Post
paid without reducing the Sum
Harvest +
Insured. Only MSA claim and wide-
Yield Loss)
spread localized claims will be
adjusted with final Yield Loss
claims)
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
208

--- Page 209 ---
Sum Insured/Ha 50,000 Sum Insured as per Notification
Area Insured (Ha) 1 Insured Area
Total Sum Insured
(Rs.) 50,000 As per notification
Localized Claims Crop Loss %age as per Individual
Loss %age 0% farm level Loss Assessment
Arrived after multiplying Sum
I n s u r e d v a l u e a n d % a g e of payable
Localized
Localized claims - localized loss
Claim
At subsequent localized claim,
max. of loss %age payable as claim
Payable Localized a f t e r a d j u s t i n g a l r e a d y paid
claims (A) - localized claim
Residual Sum
Insured for Sum Insured will not reduce and
Localized Claims s h a l l r e m a i n s a m e as per Notified
(Rs.) 50,000 Value
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced
Insured for b y A m o u n t o f L o calized claims
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced
Insured for Post- b y A m o u n t o f L o calized claims
Harvest (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced
Insured for Yield b y A m o u n t o f L o calized claims
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable
Estimated Wide- Estimated Crop Loss turns to WSL
Spread Loss on Loss if affected area > 25% of
Sample Survey 65% Insured area
Wide-Spread Claim 25% of Estimated Claims based on
Wide- Loss %age 16% sample survey of crop loss
Spread Arrived after multiplying residual
Localized Widespread S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e and %age of
Claim Localized Claim 8,125 crop loss under WSL claim
At this stage previously paid claims
under any other peril doesn’t get
Net Payable WSL a d j u s t e d , b u t g e t s adjusted if the
Claim (B) 8,125 peril is same, i.e. WSL or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
(Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same,
Residual Sum subsequent claims on area-
Insured for a p p r o a c h s h a l l b e adjusted with
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable claims
Residual Sum
Insured for Post- S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
Harvest (Rs.) 41,875 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same and
Residual Sum no wide area-approach loss %age
Insured for Yield s h a l l l e a d t o r e d u ction in Sum
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Insured value
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
209

--- Page 210 ---
Estimated Crop Loss (MSA loss
Estimated AY Loss 80% %age) to be >50% of Normal Yield,
Mid-Term Claim 25% of Estimated Claims based on
Loss %age 20% Indemnity Level
Arrived after multiplying residual
Midterm
S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e and %age of
Claim
Mid-Term Claim 10,000 crop loss under mid-term claim
At this stage previously paid claims
under any other peril doesn’t get
Net Payable a d j u s t e d , b u t g e t s adjusted if the
Midterm Claim (B) 1,875 peril is same, i.e. WSL or MSA
Residual Sum
Insured for
Localized Claims S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
(Rs.) 40,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same,
Residual Sum subsequent claims on area-
Insured for a p p r o a c h s h a l l b e adjusted with
WSL/Mid Term (Rs.) 50,000 paid/payable claims
Residual Sum
Insured for Post-
Harvest/WSPHL S u m I n s u r e d w i l l be reduced by net
(Rs.) 40,000 paid/payable MSA/WSL Loss
Sum Insured will remain same and
Residual Sum no wide area-approach loss %age
Insured for Yield s h a l l l e a d t o r e d u ction in Sum
Loss (Rs.) 50,000 Insured value
Sub-Total Claims
Paid (D) 10,000 Sub total of A, B & C
Estimated Wide- Estimated Crop Loss turns to WSPH
Spread Loss on Loss if affected area > 25% of
Sample Survey 30% Insured area
Widespread Wide-Spread Claim
Post Loss %age 8%
Harvest Wide-Spread Post 1 0 0 % o f E s t i m a t e d Claims based on
Loss Harvest Claim 3,000 sample survey of crop loss
Arrived after multiplying residual
Payable WSL Post S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e and %age of
Harvest Claim (E) 3,000 crop loss under WSPH claim
Residual Sum Sum Insured value will be reduced
Insured for Yield b y A m o u n t o f W SL Post Harvest
Loss (Rs.) 47,000 claims paid/payable
Yield Shortfall 40% As per yield loss based on AY value
Arrived after multiplying residual
S u m I n s u r e d v a l u e and %age of
Yield Based
Eligible Yield Claim 18,800 yield loss
Claim
To be adjusted with Mid Term
Net Payable Yield C l a i m s & W i d e - S p read localized
Claim (F) 8,800 claim already paid
Gross Total Payable
Claim 21,800 Gross Total of D, E & F
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
210

--- Page 211 ---
Annexure-Vl
Opt-out form for PMFBY/RWBCIS Scheme
Name of Bank
Date: _____/_____/20___
Bank Branch Name: ______________________________Branch code
no.__________________
Applicant Details
1. Name of the KCC Holder:
2. KCC Loan Account No:
3. Mobile/Telephone No:
I am aware of the scheme provisions and benefits of PMFBY/RWBCIS. I hereby,
declare that I would like to continue with KCC loan scheme, however, I am opting
out of PMFBY/RWBCIS from Kharif/Rabi (Year)____________ season by choice.
Therefore, requesting for non- enrolment under the scheme.
Signature of account holder
Disclaimer: In case, if the farmer wishes to insure for some of the crops under the
scheme he/she needs to get himself/herself enrol under the scheme through other
channels of enrolment like Common Service Centre, Insurance Intermediaries of
Insurance Companies, Online facility on PMFBY Portal or Crop Insurance App.
For office use: The above declaration is recorded in the bank documents for
appropriate action as on date.
Branch Manager (signature) with date
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------
Farmer Acknowledgement
Opt-out form for PMFBY/RWBCIS Scheme
Date: _____/_____/20___
Bank Branch Name:____________________Branch code no._________________
Applicant Details
1. Name of the KCC Holder:
2. KCC Loan Account No.
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
211

--- Page 212 ---
3. Mobile/Telephone No.
4. Op(cid:415)ng Out for season: Kharif/Rabi (Year)___________________
Disclaimer: In case, if the farmer to Partial Opt In for some of the crops under the
scheme he/she needs to get himself/herself enrol under the scheme through other
channels of enrolment like Common Service Centre, Agents of Insurance
Companies, Online facility on PMFBY Portal or android based Crop Insurance App.
For office use: The above declaration is recorded in the bank documents for
appropriate action as on date.
Branch Manager (signature) with date
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
212

--- Page 213 ---
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare Government of India
www.pmfby.gov.in
www.pmfby.gov.in
Operational Guidelines 2023 of PMFBY
213
