
--- Page 1 ---
January, 2019
Whistle Blower Policy
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana
National Health Authority
1. Preface
1.1 Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojna is a flagship program of the
Government of India. This program will cover over 10 crore poor and vulnerable
families (approximately 50 crore beneficiaries) providing coverage up to 5 lakh rupees
per family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization. This will be the
world’s largest government funded health care programme.
1.2 For effective implementation of ABPM-JAY, an autonomous entity, National Health
Authority (NHA) was constituted. The NHA is providing overall vision and
stewardship for design, roll-out, implementation and management of ABPM-
JAY in alliance with state governments. Inter-alia, this includes, formulation of
ABPM-JAY policies, development of operational guidelines, implementation
mechanisms, co-ordination with state governments, monitoring and oversight of
ABPM-JAY amongst other.
1.3 The ABPM-JAY Whistle Blower Policy is being issued by the NHA as a step towards
strengthening transparency and accountability in the implementation of ABPM-JAY.
The ABPM-JAY Whistle Blower Policy has the following objective:
“to establish a mechanism to receive complaints relating to disclosure on any
allegation of corruption, medical and non-medical fraud or wilful misuse of power
or wilful misuse of discretion against any stakeholder involved with the
implementation of ABPM-JAY and to inquire or cause an inquiry into such
disclosure and to provide adequate safeguards against victimisation of the person
making such complaint and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.”
1.4 The SHA i.e. State Level Agencies implementing ABPM-JAY are encouraged and
advised to adopt a Whistle Blower policy on similar lines.
2. Definitions
In this ABPM-JAY Whistle Blower Policy, unless the context otherwise requires:
a. "Applicable Laws" shall mean laws of India.
b. “Competent Authority” means an officer who will nominate the Whistle Officer and
would lead the constitution of Whistle Committee to conduct a detailed investigation
under this Policy. He/ She shall also be the officer who will take a final decision on the
investigation report submitted by Whistle Committee and shall also look into appeals
from the Whistle Blower and recommend disciplinary action if any as per the
procedure laid down in this Policy and/or as per applicable law.
Page 1 of 6

--- Page 2 ---
January, 2019
c. “Complaint” means the written Communication by Whistle Blower containing
Protected Disclosure and Letter of Identity of the Whistle Blower.
d. “Whistle Officer” means an officer who is nominated/ appointed to conduct detailed
investigation of the Protected Disclosure received and who will submit the initial
Report to the Whistle Committee.
e. “Whistle Committee” means the Committee formed and constituted for the
purposes of this policy under approval and jurisdiction of the Competent Authority.
The Whistle Committee shall further deliberate on the investigation Report submitted
by the Whistle Officer following the principles of natural justice. The Committee may
seek assistance of any other official as may be required on specific approval of
Competent Authority.
f. “Disciplinary Action” shall mean any action that can be taken by the Competent
Authority on the completion of the investigation proceedings including but not limited
to a warning, imposition of fine, initiation of civil or criminal proceedings under the
applicable laws/ conduct rules, suspension/ dismissal/ demotion/ from official duties
or any such action as is deemed to be fit considering the gravity of the matter.
g. “Good Faith” shall refer to a communication from an individual deemed to be
communicating in ‘good faith’ if there is a reasonable basis for communication of
unethical and improper practices or any other alleged wrongful conduct.
h. “ABPM-JAY” shall mean the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana,
a national program launched by the Government of India in 2018.
i. “ABPM-JAY Whistle Blower Policy” shall mean and be referred to as “this policy/
Whistle Blower Policy” aimed at establishing a mechanism to receive complaints
relating to Protected Disclosure on an allegation of corruption or wilful misuse of
power or medical/non-medical fraudulent activity or wilful misuse of discretion against
NHA , its staff and consultants involved with the implementation of ABPM-JAY and to
inquire or cause an inquiry into such Protected Disclosure and to provide adequate
safeguards against victimisation of the person making such complaint and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto;
j. “Protected Disclosure” means a concern raised through a written communication
made in good faith that discloses or demonstrates information that may evidence
unethical or improper activity. Protected Disclosures should be factual and not
speculative in nature. Procedure related to a Protected Disclosure shall be read as
per clause 4 hereunder.
k. “SHA” or the “State Health Agency” shall mean the Agency/institution set up by a
State Government for the administration and implementation of the ABPM-JAY.
l. “Staff” shall mean any person employed as an employee and/or engaged by NHA
and shall include individuals on deputation, contract, temporary, probationer,
apprentice, trainee, part time employees / workers, full time consultants, holding
Page 2 of 6

--- Page 3 ---
January, 2019
permanent, honorary, ad hoc, voluntary or short-term positions. For the limited
purpose of this policy term “Employee” includes vendor.
m. “Whistle Blower” shall mean staff, who makes a Protected Disclosure and
undertakes the activity of Whistle Blowing. The Whistle blower is not expected to
prove the truth of the allegation; but he/she needs to demonstrate sufficient grounds
for concern and good faith.
3. Concept of Whistle Blowing:
Whistle Blowing is, a mechanism to receive complaints relating to disclosure on any
allegation of corruption or wilful misuse of power/discretion against NHA and its staff as
defined in clause 2(k) hereinabove involved with the implementation of ABPM-JAY and to
inquire or cause an inquiry into such Protected Disclosure and to provide adequate
safeguards against victimisation of the person making such complaint and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
4. Procedure of handling Complaint:
4.1. All complaints containing Protected Disclosures will be made to the Whistle Officer.
However if the Complaint containing Protected Disclosure is against Whistle Officer than
Complaint shall be made directly to Competent Authority.
4.2. Every Protected Disclosure shall be made in writing by electronic mail (e-mail) or by
sending a typed and signed letter in a sealed envelope by post / courier or hand-
delivered in accordance with the procedure laid down below. All such Protected
Disclosures shall include full particulars of the Whistle Blower. The Whistle Blower
should give his/her name, address and/or other identity details in a separate attached
letter in the Complaint which should be detachable from the Protected Disclosure
(hereinafter be referred as “Letter of Identity”). Protected Disclosure (shall contain
details adequate enough for Whistle Officer to take cognizance of the complaint) and be
accompanied by supporting documents, or other materials, if any. The Whistle Officer
and or the Whistle Committee may, if it deems fit, call for further information or
particulars from the person making the disclosure.
o The envelop shall be super scribed with “Complaint under ABPM-JAY Whistle
Blower Policy marked “Private and Confidential”
o If not super scribed properly and if the Letter of Identity is not in a detachable
sheet as specified hereinabove, identity of the Whistle Blower may be
compromised.
o Email disclosures shall be made only at the following mail addresses: Mail IDs of
the Whistle Officer: Email tareg@cag.gov.in with subject line as “with “Complaint
under ABPM-JAY Whistle Blower Policy”.
Page 3 of 6

--- Page 4 ---
January, 2019
4.3. It is recommended that each complaint/Protected Disclosure shall include the following
minimum information in the format indicated herein this clause: the type of alleged
wrongdoing, the location and time period when the event(s) occurred the dates and
places wherever possible, the individuals allegedly involved, how the individual,
organization or company committed the alleged wrongdoing, why the whistle-blower
believes that the conduct should be investigated and why he/she is reporting the matter
etc. . It should be specifically stated in the Complaint by the Whistle Blower whether the
whistle-blower wants an acknowledgement of the complaint sent by him/her. Further,
there should be documents and references to other sources to support the complaint.
5. Handling the Protected Disclosure:
5.1. NHA shall set up a centralised registry of all Complaints received under this Policy.
Every Complaint received by shall have an identification reference number assigned to it
and shall be acknowledged if the complainant has specifically requested for an
acknowledgement in its complaint.
5.2. The Whistle Officer shall ensure a prima facie assessment of all Complaints to
determine the need for further action on the Complaint. Whistle Officer shall seek for
additional documents if required to proceed for further investigation. The Whistle Officer
shall detach the Letter of Identity, maintain the Original Copy of the Complaint in his
official records and shall submit its findings along with photocopy of Protected
Disclosure (ensuring protection of identity of Whistle Blower) to Whistle Committee not
later than 30 days from the date of receipt of Protected disclosure/Complaint. The
Whistle Committee, thereon shall conduct such investigations in a timely manner and
shall submit a written report containing the findings and recommendations to the
Competent Authority as soon as practically possible and in any case, not later than 60
(sixty) days from the date of receipt of the findings from Whistle Officer. The Competent
Authority may allow additional time for submission of the report based on the
circumstances of the case. During this assessment, the Whistle Committee may jointly
examine the allegations.
5.3. If the Whistle Committee decides to proceed with investigating the complaint, it shall:
a. Conduct the enquiry in a fair, unbiased manner;
b. Ensure complete fact-finding;
c. Maintain strict confidentiality,
d. Decide on the outcome of the investigation, whether an improper practice has
been committed and if so by whom;
e. Recommend an appropriate course of action - suggested disciplinary action,
including dismissal, and preventive measures; and
f. Record Committee deliberations and document the final recommendation report
for onward submission and final review by the Competent Authority.
5.4. For the purpose of making discreet inquiry or obtaining information the Competent
Authority shall be at liberty to take assistance of the existing law enforcement agencies
and investigating agencies, or any other authority as may be considered necessary.
5.5. For the Purposes of any such enquiry, the Competent Authority shall have the powers of
summoning, enforcing attendance, discovery and production of any document, receiving
evidence on affidavits, examination of witnesses or documents and such other matters
as may be prescribed from time to time.
Page 4 of 6

--- Page 5 ---
January, 2019
5.6. Whilst it may be difficult for the Whistle Officer to keep the Whistle Blower regularly
updated on the progress of the investigations, she/he will keep the Whistle Blower
informed of the result of the investigations and its recommendations to the extent
possible, subject to any obligations of confidentiality.
5.7. In exceptional cases, where the Whistle Blower is not satisfied with the outcome of the
investigation carried out by the Whistle Officer or the Whistle Committee, he/she can
make a direct appeal to the Competent Authority. Competent Authority may act on the
appeal (Review/ order a fresh investigation. Whistle Committee may send him new
report. The Competent Authority may accept or dismiss Appeal on the reasons recorded
in the final report and the final outcome is thus communicated to Whistle Blower
accordingly.
6. Confidentiality:
Whistle blowers are encouraged to share their identity along with their protected
disclosures. Whistle Officer, Whistle Committee and Competent Authority shall ensure
confidentiality of all information arising from whistleblowing reports. It shall treat all
reports, including the identity of the Whistle Blower and the person/s complained of, in a
confidential and sensitive manner. The identity of the Whistle Blower will be kept
confidential, unless compelled by law or the Courts to be revealed, or unless the Whistle
Blower authorized the release of her / his identity or releases his/her identity
himself/herself
7. Protection against retaliation and victimisation:
7.1. Retaliatory acts against Whistle Blowers who submit whistleblowing Complaints in good
faith shall not be tolerated by the NHA and shall extend all possible assistance to the
Whistle Blower under existing laws.
7.2. NHA will not tolerate the harassment or victimization of anyone raising a genuine
concern. Any other Staff/Person/business associate assisting in the said investigation
shall also be protected to the same extent as the Whistle Blower. Any Whistle Blower
who believes he/she is being retaliated against must contact the Competent Authorities
immediately.
8. Offences and penalties:
8.1. Any action that violates one or more of the provisions of this Policy in general and
Clause 7 of this Policy in particular shall be deemed to be an offence and shall be dealt
with by the Competent Authorities as per the provisions of the Policy and Applicable
Laws.
8.2. The Competent Authority shall have the powers to take cognizance of offences based on
Complaints or on its own assessment. It shall decide on offences based on the
principles of Natural Justice and as per the provisions of existing and Applicable Laws
and shall have the power to to cause suspension/ dismissal/ demotion/ from official
duties or any such action as is deemed to be fit considering the gravity of the matter
and may seek recourse to law enforcement agencies and take such legal action which
may be civil and/or criminal in nature as per applicable laws of India.
Page 5 of 6

--- Page 6 ---
January, 2019
9. Reporting and monitoring:
A quarterly status report on the total number of Complaints received during the period,
with summary of the findings of the Whistle Committee and the corrective actions taken
will be sent by the Whistle Officer to the Competent Authority.
10. Amendment:
NHA is entitled to amend, suspend or rescind this policy at any time. Whilst, NHA has
made best efforts to define detailed procedures for implementation of this policy, there
may be occasions when certain matters are not addressed or there may be ambiguity in
the procedures. Such difficulties or ambiguities will be resolved in line with the broad
intent of the policy. NHA may also establish further rules and procedures, from time to
time, to give effect to the intent of this policy and further the objective of good corporate
governance.
*****************
Page 6 of 6
