RBI/2025-26/04
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.03/02.01.001/2025-26 April 01, 2025
The Chairman/Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
SLBC/UTLBC Convenor Banks/Lead Banks
Madam/Dear Sir,
Master Circular – Lead Bank Scheme
The Reserve Bank of India has issued a number of guidelines/ instructions on Lead
Bank Scheme from time to time. This Master Circular consolidates the relevant
guidelines/ instructions issued by Reserve Bank of India on Lead Bank Scheme up to
March 31, 2025 as listed in the Appendix I.
2. This Master Circular has been placed on the RBI website https://www.rbi.org.in
Yours faithfully,
(Nisha Nambiar)
Chief General Manager-in-Charge
Encl.: As above
वित्त‍ीय‍समािेशन‍और‍विकास‍विभाग, केन्द्रीय‍कायाालय,10 िी‍मंविल,‍केंरीय‍कायाालय‍भिन, शहीद‍भगतससंह‍मागा,पोस्ट‍बॉक्स‍सं. 10014,‍मबं ई -400001
Financial Inclusion & Development Dept, Central Office,10th Floor, Central Office Building, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, P.B.No.10014, Mumbai-1
टेली Tel :022-22601000 फैक्सः 91-22-22621011/22610943/22610948 ई-मेल : cgmincfidd@rbi.org.in
सहदं ी आसान ह,ै इसका प्रयोग‍बढ़ाइए।
“चेतािनी:ररज़िा‍बैंक द्वारा‍मेल-डाक,‍एसएमएस‍या‍फोन‍कॉल‍के‍िररए‍ककसी‍की‍भी‍व्‍यविगत‍िानकारी‍िैसे‍बैंक‍के‍खाते‍का‍ब्‍यौरा,‍पासिडा‍आकद‍नहीं‍मांगी‍िाती‍ह।ै‍यह‍धन‍रखने‍या‍देने‍का‍प्रस्‍ताि‍भी‍
नहीं‍करता‍ह।ै‍ऐसे‍प्रस्‍तािों‍का‍ककसी‍भी‍तरीके‍से‍ििाब‍मत‍दीविए।"
Caution: RBI never sends mails, SMSs or makes calls asking for personal information like bank account details, passwords, etc. It never keeps or
offers funds to anyone. Please do not respond in any manner to such offers.

Structure
1 Introduction
2 Fora under Lead Bank Scheme
2.1 Block Level Bankers’ Committee
2.2 District Consultative Committee (DCC)
2.2.1 Constitution of DCC
2.2.2 Conduct of DCC Meetings
2.2.3 Agenda for DCC Meetings
2.2.4 Role of LDMs
2.2.5 Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal
2.2.6 District Level Review Committee (DLRC) Meetings
2.2.7 DCC/DLRC meetings – Annual Calendar of Meetings
2.3 State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
2.3.1 Constitution of SLBC
2.3.2 Conduct of SLBC Meetings
2.3.3 Revised Agenda for SLBC Meetings
2.3.4 SLBC – Yearly Calendar of Meetings
2.3.5 SLBC Website – Standardization of information/data
2.3.6 Liaison with State Government
2.3.7 Capacity Building/Training/Sensitization Programmes
3 Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme
3.1 Preparation of credit plans
3.2 Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs)
3.3 Monitoring the performance of credit plans
3.4 Revised mechanism of Data Flow for LBS fora meetings
4 Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility
5 Banking Penetration
5.1 Roadmap for provision of banking services in unbanked villages
Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with
5.2 population more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled
commercial bank
Aligning roadmap for unbanked villages having population more than
5.3
5000 with revised guidelines on Branch Authorisation Policy
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024 – Universal
5.4
Access to Financial Services
6 Credit Deposit Ratio
6.1 CD Ratio of banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
6.2 Implementation of the recommendations of Expert Group on CD Ratio
7 Direct Benefit Transfer
8 Service Area Approach (SAA)
8.1 Dispensing with ‘No Due Certificate’
9 Enhancing Farmers’ Income
10 Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments Ecosystem

Introduction
(i) The genesis of the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) can be traced to the Study Group
headed by Prof. D. R. Gadgil (Gadgil Study Group) on the Organizational Framework
for Implementation of the Social Objectives, which submitted its report in October
1969. The Study Group drew attention to the fact that commercial banks did not have
adequate presence in rural areas and also lacked the required rural orientation. The
Study Group, therefore, recommended the adoption of an 'Area Approach' to evolve
plans and programmes for the development of an adequate banking and credit
structure in the rural areas.
(ii) A Committee of Bankers on Branch Expansion Programme of Public Sector Banks
(PSBs) appointed by the Reserve Bank of India under the Chairmanship of Shri F. K.
F. Nariman (Nariman Committee) endorsed the idea of an ‘Area Approach’ in its report
(November 1969), recommending that in order to enable the PSBs to discharge their
social responsibilities, each bank should concentrate on certain districts where it
should act as a 'Lead Bank'.
(iii) Pursuant to the above recommendations, the LBS was introduced by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) in December 1969. The Scheme aims at coordinating the activities
of banks and other developmental agencies through various fora to achieve the
objective of enhancing the flow of bank finance to the priority sector and other sectors
and to promote banks' role in the overall development of the rural sector. For
coordinating the activities in a district, a particular bank is assigned ‘Lead Bank’
responsibility of the district. The Lead Bank is expected to assume a leadership role
for coordinating the efforts of the credit institutions and the Government.
(iv) In view of the several changes that had taken place in the financial sector, the LBS
was last reviewed by the High Level Committee headed by Smt. Usha Thorat, former
Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India in 2009.
(v) The Committee held wide ranging discussions with various stakeholders, viz., State
Governments, banks, development institutions, academicians, NGOs, MFIs, etc. and
noted that the scheme has been useful in achieving its original objectives of
improvement in branch expansion, deposit mobilisation and lending to the priority
sector, especially in rural/semi urban areas. There was overwhelming consensus that
LBS needs to continue. Based on the recommendations of the Committee, guidelines

were issued to State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) Convenor banks and Lead
Banks for implementation.
(vi) Envisaging greater role for private sector banks (PvSBs), Lead Banks were
advised to ensure that PvSBs are more closely and actively involved in the
implementation of the LBS, by leveraging on Information Technology and bringing in
their expertise in strategic planning. They were also advised to involve themselves in
preparation as well as implementation of the District Credit Plan (DCP).
(vii) Further, RBI constituted a “Committee of Executive Directors” of the Bank to study
the efficacy of the scheme and suggest measures for its improvement. Based on the
Committee’s recommendations and feedback received from various stakeholders,
certain ‘action points’ were issued to SLBC Convenors/Lead Banks and NABARD on
April 6, 2018.
2. Fora under Lead Bank Scheme
2.1 Block Level Bankers’ Committee
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) is a forum for achieving coordination between
credit institutions and field level development agencies at the block level. The forum
prepares and reviews the implementation of the Block Credit Plan and resolves
operational issues in the implementation of the credit programmes of banks. The Lead
District Manager (LDM) of the district is the Chairman of the BLBC. All the banks
operating in the block including Small Finance Banks (SFBs), Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries (WOS) of Foreign Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), District Central
Co-operative Banks (DCCBs), Block Development Officer, technical officers in the
block such as extension officers for agriculture, industries and co-operatives are
members of the Committee. BLBC meetings are held at quarterly intervals. To
strengthen the BLBC forum, which operates at the base level of the LBS, it is
necessary that all branch managers attend BLBC meetings and enrich the discussions
with their valuable inputs. Controlling Heads of banks may also attend a few of the
BLBC meetings selectively. Participation by the District Development Manager (DDM)
of NABARD in BLBCs would ensure better and more meaningful discussions for the
development of the Block. Therefore, NABARD has been advised that DDMs should
attend all BLBC meetings in their districts and actively participate in the credit planning

exercise and review meetings at the block level. The Lead District Officer (LDO) of the
RBI selectively attends the BLBC meetings. Representatives of Panchayat Samitis are
also invited to attend the meetings at half yearly intervals to share their knowledge and
experience on rural development in the credit planning exercise. Payments Banks
(PBs) should also be invited to attend the meetings.
2.2 District Consultative Committee
2.2.1 Constitution of DCC
District Consultative Committees (DCCs) were constituted in the early seventies as a
common forum at the district level for bankers as well as Government agencies/
departments to facilitate coordination in implementing various developmental activities
under the LBS. The District Collector is the Chairman of the DCC meetings. RBI,
NABARD, all commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign Banks, RRBs, PBs,
State / District Central Co-operative Banks, various State Government departments
and allied agencies are the members of the DCC. The LDO represents the RBI as a
member of the DCC. The LDM convenes the DCC meetings. The Director of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Institute (MSME-DI) in the district is an
invitee in districts where MSME clusters are located to discuss issues concerning
MSMEs.
2.2.2 Conduct of DCC Meetings
i) DCC meetings should be convened by the Lead Banks at quarterly intervals.
ii) At the DCC level, sub-committees as appropriate, may be set up to work intensively
on specific issues and submit reports to the DCC for its consideration.
iii) DCC should give adequate feedback to the SLBC on various issues that need to
be discussed on a wider platform, so that these receive adequate attention at the
state level.
2.2.3 Agenda for DCC Meetings
While Lead Banks are expected to address the problems particular to the concerned
districts, some of the important areas common to all districts, which the Lead Banks
should invariably discuss in the fora are as under:
i) Review of progress under Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP)
ii) Specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial inclusion

iii) Issues to facilitate 'enablers' and remove/minimise 'impeders' for banking
development for inclusive growth
iv) Monitoring initiatives for providing 'Credit Plus' activities by banks and State
Governments, such as, setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) and
RSETI1 type Training Institutes for providing skills and capacity building to
manage businesses
v) Scaling up financial literacy efforts to achieve financial inclusion
vi) Review of performance of banks under District Credit Plan (DCP)
vii) Flow of credit to priority sector and weaker sections of the society
viii) Enhancing Farmers’ Income
ix) Assistance under Government sponsored schemes
x) Grant of educational loans
xi) Progress under SHG - bank linkage
xii) SME financing and bottlenecks thereof, if any
xiii) Timely submission of data by banks
xiv) Review of relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever applicable)
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Lead Banks may include any other
agenda item considered necessary.
2.2.4 Role of Lead District Managers
As the effectiveness of the LBS depends on the dynamism of the District Collectors
and the LDMs, with the support of the Regional/ Zonal Office, the office of LDM should
be sufficiently strengthened with appropriate infrastructural support. Apart from the
provision of a separate office space, technical infrastructure like computers, printer,
data connectivity, etc. which are necessities for LDMs to discharge their core
responsibilities may be provided to their office without exception. Officers of
appropriate level, attitude and possessing requisite leadership skills should be posted
as LDMs. Additionally, it is suggested that a dedicated vehicle may be provided to
LDMs to facilitate closer liaison with bank officials, district administration officials as
Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) should be more actively involved and monitored at various fora of LBS,
particularly at the DCC level. Focus should be on development of skills to enhance credit absorption capacity in the area and
renewing the training programmes towards sustainable micro enterprises. RSETIs should design specific programmes for each
district/ block, keeping in view the skill mapping and the potential of the region for necessary skill training and skill up gradation
of the rural youth in the district.

also to organise/ attend various financial literacy initiatives and meetings. The absence
of a specialist officer/ assistant for data entry/ analysis is a common and major issue
faced by LDMs. Liberty to hire the services of skilled computer operator/s may be given
to the LDMs to overcome the shortage of staff in case appropriate staff is not posted
at LDM’s office. Further, for successful functioning of the LBS, we expect Lead Banks
to go the extra mile to provide facilities over and above the bare minimum to these
critical field functionaries. Apart from the usual role of LDMs like convening meetings
of the DCC and District Level Review Committee (DLRC) and periodical meetings of
DDM/ LDO/ Government officials for resolving outstanding issues etc., the new
functions envisaged for LDMs include the following:
i) Monitoring the implementation of the District Credit Plan
ii) Associate with the setting up of Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs), RSETIs by
banks
iii) Associate with organizing financial literacy camps by FLCs and rural branches
of banks
iv) Holding annual sensitisation workshops for banks and Government officials
with participation by NGOs/Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
v) Arranging for quarterly awareness and feedback public meetings, grievance
redressal, etc.
2.2.5 Quarterly Public Meeting and Grievance Redressal
The LDM should convene a quarterly public meeting at various locations in the district,
in coordination with the LDO of RBI, banks having presence in the area and other
stakeholders to generate awareness on the various banking policies and regulations
relating to the common person, obtain feedback from the public and provide grievance
redressal to the extent possible at such meetings or facilitate approaching the
appropriate machinery for such redressal.
2.2.6 District Level Review Committee Meetings
DLRC meetings are chaired by the District Collector and attended by members of the
DCC. Public Representatives, i.e., Local MPs/MLAs/ Zilla Parishad Chiefs are also
invited to these meetings. The DLRC meetings should be convened by the Lead Banks
at least once in a quarter. The DLRC is a forum to review the pace and quality of
implementation of various programmes under the LBS in the district. Hence,
association of non-officials is considered useful. Public representatives (MPs/ MLAs /

Zilla Panchayat Chiefs) shall invariably be invited to DLRC meetings. Therefore, Lead
Banks should fix the date of DLRC meetings with due regard to the convenience of
the representatives of the public, i.e., MPs/MLAs etc., to invite and involve them in all
functions conducted by the banks in their districts, such as opening of new banking
outlets, distribution of Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs), Self Help Group (SHG) credit
linkage programmes, etc. Responses to queries from public representatives need to
be accorded highest priority and attended to promptly. The forum may also have
representatives of State Minority Commission, SC/ST Corporation and
representatives of the group of beneficiaries of rural lending. The forum may also
consider inviting people with expertise in fields, such as progressive farmers and local
industrialists as special invitees. The follow up of the DLRC’s decisions is required to
be discussed in the DCC meetings.
A compendium of instructions outlining the salient features of DLRC forum is given at
Annex V.
2.2.7 DCC/ DLRC meetings- Annual Calendar of Meetings
i) DCC and DLRC are the important fora facilitating coordination among commercial
banks, Government agencies and others at the district level to review and find
solutions to the problems hindering developmental activities. Therefore, it is necessary
that all the members participate and deliberate in these meetings. On a review of the
DCC/ DLRC meetings, it was observed that late receipt/ non-receipt of intimation of
the date of meetings, clash of dates with other events, commonality of dates, etc.,
hinder participation of members in these meetings, thus undermining the prime
objective of conducting the meetings.
ii) Lead Banks have, therefore, been advised to prepare an Annual Schedule of DCC
and DLRC meetings on calendar year basis for all districts, in consultation with the
Chairperson of the meetings, LDO of the RBI and Public Representatives in case of
DLRC. This yearly calendar should be prepared at the beginning of each year and
circulated to all members as advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the
DCC and DLRC meetings and the meetings should be conducted as per the calendar.
While preparing the calendar, it should be ensured that DCC and DLRC meetings are
not held simultaneously. Lead Banks must fix dates of DLRC meetings, taking into
account the convenience of the MPs and circulate the agenda papers to MPs well in
advance.

2.3 State Level Bankers’ Committee
2.3.1 Constitution of SLBC
i) The State Level Bankers’ Committee was constituted in April 1977, as an apex inter-
institutional forum to create adequate coordination machinery in all States, on a
uniform basis for development of the State. SLBC is chaired by the Chairman/
Managing Director/ Executive Director of the Convenor Bank. It comprises
representatives of commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign Banks, RRBs,
PBs, State Cooperative Banks, RBI, NABARD, heads of Government departments
including representatives from National Commission for Scheduled Castes/Tribes,
National Horticulture Board, Khadi & Village Industries Commission, etc., and
representatives of financial institutions operating in a State, who come together and
sort out coordination problems at the policy implementation level. Representatives of
various organizations from different sectors of the economy like industry bodies, retail
traders, exporters, farmers’ unions, etc. are special invitees in the SLBC meetings for
discussing their specific problems, if any. SLBC meetings are held on quarterly basis.
The responsibility for convening the SLBC meetings would be of the SLBC Convenor
Bank of the State.
ii) Recognising that SLBCs, primarily as a committee of bankers at the State level, play
an important role in the development of the State, illustrative guidelines on the conduct
of SLBC meetings have been issued.
2.3.2 Conduct of SLBC Meetings
i) SLBC meetings are required to be held regularly at quarterly intervals. The meetings
are chaired by the Chairman/ Managing Director/ Executive Director of the Convenor
Bank and co-chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary or Development Commissioner
of the State concerned. In cases where the Managing Director/Chief Executive
Officer/Executive Director of the SLBC Convenor Bank is unable to attend SLBC
Meetings, the Regional Director/ GM(O-i-C) of the RBI shall co-chair the meetings
along with the Additional Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner of the State
concerned. A High Level of participation in SLBC/ UTLBC meetings ensures an
effective and desired outcome with meaningful discussion on issues of public policy of
both the Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India.

ii) The Chief Minister/Finance Minister and senior level officers of the State/RBI (of the
rank of Deputy Governor / Executive Director) may be invited to attend the SLBC
meetings. Further, the State Chief Ministers are encouraged to attend at least one
SLBC meeting in a year.
iii) State Level Bankers’ Committee meetings should primarily focus on policy issues
with participation of only the senior functionaries of the banks/ Government
Departments. All routine issues may be delegated to sub-committee(s) of the SLBC.
A Steering Sub-committee may be constituted in the SLBC to deliberate on agenda
proposals from different stakeholders and finalise a compact agenda for the SLBC
meetings. Typically, the sub-committee could consist of SLBC Convenor, RBI &
NABARD representatives & senior State Government representative from the
concerned department, e.g., Finance/ Institutional Finance and two to three banks
having major presence. The sub-committee may be chaired by the Convenor (i.e.,
generally General Manager) of the SLBC Convenor Bank.
iv) Other issue-specific sub-committees may be constituted as required. The sub-
committees may examine the specific issues relating to agriculture, micro,
small/medium industries/enterprises, handloom finance, export promotion and
financial inclusion, etc., in-depth and devise solutions/recommendations for adoption
by the full committee. They are expected to meet more frequently than the SLBC. The
composition of the sub-committees and subjects/ specific issues impeding/enabling
financial inclusion to be deliberated upon, may vary from State to State depending on
the specific problems/issues faced by the States.
v) The secretariat / offices of the SLBC should be sufficiently strengthened to enable
the SLBC Convenor Bank to effectively discharge its functions.
vi) The various fora at lower levels may give adequate feedback to the SLBC on issues
that need to be discussed on a wider platform.
vii) Several institutions and academicians are engaged in research, studies etc., that
have implications for sustainable development in agriculture and MSME sector.
Engaging with such research institutions and academicians would be useful in bringing
in new ideas for furthering the objectives of the LBS. The SLBCs may, therefore,
identify such academicians and researchers and invite them as 'special invitees' to

attend SLBC meetings occasionally both for adding value to the discussions and also
associate them with studies appropriate to the State. Other 'special invitees' may be
invited to attend SLBC meetings depending on the agenda items/issues to be
discussed in the meetings.
viii) The activities of NGOs in facilitating and channelling credit to the low income
households are expected to increase in the coming years. Several corporate houses
are also engaged in corporate social responsibility activities for sustainable
development. A linkage with such NGOs/Corporate houses operating in the area to
ensure that the NGOs/corporates provide the necessary 'credit plus' services can help
leverage bank credit for inclusive growth. Success stories could be presented in SLBC
meetings to serve as models that could be replicated.
2.3.3 Revised Agenda for SLBC Meetings
1. Review of financial inclusion initiatives, expansion of banking network and
Financial Literacy:
a. Status of opening of banking outlets in unbanked villages, CBS-enabled
banking outlets at the unbanked rural centres (URCs)
b. Review of operations of Business Correspondents (BCs) – hurdles/issues
involved
c. Progress in increasing digital modes of payment in the State, provision of
continuous connectivity with sufficient bandwidth, resolving connectivity issues/
connectivity options (Bharat Net, VSAT, etc.), installation of ATMs and PoS
machines and status of implementation of e-receipts and e-payments in the
State
d. Status of rollout of Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in the State, Aadhaar seeding
and authentication
e. Review of inclusion of Financial Education in the School Curriculum, financial
literacy initiatives by banks (particularly digital financial literacy)
f. Creating awareness about various schemes, subsidies, facilities, e.g., crop
insurance, renewable energy
g. Review of efforts towards end-to-end projects involving all stakeholders in the
supply chain.
2. Review of credit disbursement by banks:
a. Achievement under ACP of the State, Priority Sector Lending

b. Discussion on lending towards government sponsored schemes (DAY-NRLM,
DAY-NULM, MUDRA, Stand-Up India, PMEGP, etc.) and impact of these
schemes
c. Flow of credit to MSMEs and affordable housing
d. KCC loan, crop insurance under PMFBY
e. Grant of Educational Loans
f. Progress under SHG-bank linkage.
3. Enhancing Farmers’ Income
4. CD Ratio, Review of Districts with CD Ratio below 40% and working of Special
sub-committees of the DCC (SSC).
5. Position of NPAs in respect of schematic lending, Certificate Cases and Recovery
of NPAs.
6. Review of restructuring of loans in natural calamity affected districts in the State, if
any.
7. Discussion on policy initiatives of the Central/State Government/RBI (Industrial
Policy, MSME Policy, Agriculture Policy, Start-Up Policy, etc.), and expected
involvement of banks.
8. Discussion on improving rural infrastructure/ credit absorption capacity:
a. Any large project conceived by the State Government to help improve CD Ratio
b. Explore the scope of state-specific potential growth areas and the way forward
– choosing partner banks
c. Discussion on findings of region-focused studies, if any, and implementing the
suggested solutions
d. Identification of gaps in rural and agriculture infrastructure, which need
financing (rural godowns, solar power, agro processing, horticulture, allied
activities, agri-marketing, etc.)
e. Implementation of Model Land Leasing Act 2016 (exploring possibility)
9. Efforts towards skill development on mission mode, partnering with Krishi Vigyan
Kendra (KVK), Horticulture Mission, National Skill Development Corporation,
Agriculture Skill Council of India (ASCI), etc., including a review of functioning of
RSETIs.
10. Steps taken for improving land records, progress in digitization of land records and
seamless loan disbursements.

11. Sharing of success stories and new initiatives at the district level that can be
replicated in other districts or across the State.
12. Discussion on Market Intelligence Issues, e.g.:
a. Ponzi Schemes/ Illegal Activities of Unincorporated Bodies/ Firms/
Companies Soliciting Deposits from the Public
b. Banking Related Cyber Frauds, phishing, etc.
c. Instances of usurious activities by lending entities in the area, cases of over
indebtedness
d. Credit related frauds by borrower groups, etc.
13. Issues remaining unresolved at DCC/DLRC meeting.
14. Timely submission of data by banks, adhering to the schedule of SLBC meeting.
15. Any other item, with the permission of the Chair.
The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. SLBC Convenor Banks may include
any other agenda item considered necessary.
2.3.4 SLBC - Yearly Calendar of Meetings
i) To improve the effectiveness and streamline the functioning of
SLBC/UTLBC meetings, SLBC Convenor Banks have been advised to
prepare a yearly calendar of programmes (calendar year basis) at the
beginning of the year itself, for conducting the meetings. The calendar of
programmes should clearly specify the cut off dates for data submission to
SLBC and acceptance thereof by the SLBC Convenor. This yearly calendar
should be circulated to all the concerned as an advance intimation for
blocking of future dates of senior functionaries of various agencies like
Central Government, State Governments, banks, RBI, etc. The
SLBC/UTLBC meetings should be conducted as per the calendar under all
circumstances. The agenda should also be circulated in advance without
waiting for the data from defaulting banks. The matter should, however, be
taken up with the defaulting banks in the SLBC meeting. In addition, the
SLBC Convenor Bank should write a letter in this regard to the controlling
office of the defaulting banks under advice to the Regional Office of RBI.
The SLBC Convenor Bank will, however, continue to follow-up with banks
for timely data submission. Further, in case the Chief Minister, Finance
Minister or other senior functionaries are not able to attend the SLBC on

some rare occasion, then if so desired by them, a special SLBC meeting
can be held. Following broad guidelines should be used for preparation of
the calendar of programmes:
Activity To be completed by (Date)
Preparation of calendar of SLBC/UTLBC meetings 15th January every year
and intimation to all the concerned of the cut-off
dates for submission of data and dates of
meetings as per the dateline given below.
Reminder regarding the exact date of meeting and 15 days before end of the quarter
submission of data by banks to SLBC
Dead line for receipt of information/data by SLBC 15 days from the end of the quarter
Convenor Bank
Distribution of agenda cum background papers 20 days from the end of the quarter
Holding of the meeting Within 45 days from the end of the
quarter
Forwarding the minutes of the meeting to all Within 10 days from holding the
stakeholders meeting
Follow-up of the action points emerged from the To be completed within 30 days of
meeting forwarding the minutes (for review in
the next meeting)
ii) The objective of preparing the calendar of meetings in the beginning of the year is
to ensure adequate notice of these meetings and timely compilation and dispatch of
agenda papers to all stakeholders. It also ensures clear cut guidelines for the
submission of data to SLBC Convenors by participating banks and Government
Departments. It is expected to save precious time of SLBC Convenors that is otherwise
spent in taking dates from various senior functionaries attending these SLBC
meetings.
iii) SLBC Convenor Banks need to appreciate the advantages of ensuring adherence
to the yearly calendars. SLBC Convenor Banks have therefore been advised to give
wide publicity to the annual calendar at the beginning of the year and ensure that dates
of senior functionaries expected to attend the meetings are blocked for all meetings
by their offices. In case, despite blocking dates, if for some reason, the senior
functionary is not able to attend the meeting, the meeting should be held as planned
in the calendar. More importantly, the data for review in these meetings should be
received as per deadlines set in the calendar and those who do not submit the data in
time should be asked to explain the reasons for delay in sending the data that may be

recorded in the minutes of the meeting. Under no circumstance, should the preparation
of the agenda be delayed beyond the dates stipulated as per the calendar.
2.3.5 SLBC Website – Standardisation of information /data
SLBC Convenor Banks are required to maintain the SLBC websites where all
instructions pertaining to LBS and Government Sponsored Schemes are made
available and are accessible to the common man desiring any information relating to
the conduct of meetings or State-wise data/ bank-wise performance. In order to
standardize the information and data that is to be made available on the SLBC website,
an indicative list is given in the Annex II. SLBCs should arrange to place the prescribed
minimum information on the websites of SLBCs of their bank and keep it updated
regularly, at least on quarterly basis. Banks may note that the list is only indicative and
SLBCs are free to put any additional information considered relevant for the State.
2.3.6 Liaison with State Government
SLBC Convenor Banks are expected to co-ordinate the activities of all banks in the
State, discuss with State Government officials, the operational problems in lending,
extending necessary support for banking development and to achieve the objective of
financial inclusion.
2.3.7 Capacity Building/ Training/ Sensitization Programmes
i) There is a need for sensitising the District Collectors and CEOs of Zilla Parishads
on banks and banking in general as also on the specific scope and role of the LBS. In
each State, a full day ‘Sensitisation Workshop’ may be convened by the SLBC
Convenor Bank every year, preferably in April/ May. Such sensitisation should form
part of the probationary training of such officers. Further, as soon as they are posted
in a district, the SLBC may arrange for exposure visits for the District Collectors to the
SLBC Convenor’s office for sensitisation and understanding of the LBS.
ii) Staff at the operational level of banks and government agencies associated with
implementation of the LBS need to be aware of the latest developments and emerging
opportunities. There is need for staff sensitisation/ training/seminars, etc., at periodic
intervals on an ongoing basis.

3. Implementation of Lead Bank Scheme
3.1 Preparation of credit plans
Planning plays an important role in the implementation of the LBS and a bottom-up
approach is adopted to map the existing potential for development. Under LBS,
planning starts with identifying block-wise/ activity-wise potential estimated for various
sectors.
3.2 Potential Linked Credit Plans
i) Potential Linked Credit Plans (PLPs) are a step towards decentralized credit
planning with the basic objective of mapping the existing potential for development
through bank credit. PLPs take into account the long-term physical potential,
availability of infrastructure support, marketing facilities and policies/ programmes of
Government etc. NABARD to take measures to ensure that PLPs should be more
focussed and implementable so that banks can utilize them more gainfully while
preparing the Branch Credit Plan (BCP). PLPs should emphasise on promotion of
sustainable agricultural practices suitable to local conditions. While preparing the
PLPs, the focus must be on identifying processes and projects that:
a. reduce carbon foot-print,
b. prevent overuse of fertilizers,
c. ensure efficient utilisation of water, and
d. address agricultural pollution issues.
The plans must also focus on promoting innovative farming systems, such as, organic
farming, bio dynamic farming, permaculture and sustainable small-scale farming, as
also promoting Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) and Farmers’ Markets. Such
initiatives must be supported by appropriate investments and project finance
frameworks.
ii) A pre-PLP meeting is convened by the LDM during June every year to be attended
by banks, Government agencies, etc., to reflect their views and concerns regarding
credit potential (sector/activity-wise) and deliberate on major financial and socio-
economic developments in the district in the last one year and priorities to be set out
for inclusion in the PLP. The DDM of NABARD makes a presentation in this meeting
outlining the major requirements of information for preparing the PLP for the following

year. The preparation of PLP for the next year is to be completed by August every
year to enable the State Government to factor in the PLP projections.
iii) The procedure for preparing the District Credit Plan is as follows:
a) Controlling Offices of commercial banks including SFBs, WOS of Foreign
Banks and Head Office of RRBs and DCCB/LDB circulate the accepted block-
wise/activity-wise potential to all their branches for preparing the BCP by their
respective branch managers. Banks should ensure that the exercise of
preparation of branch/block plans is completed in time by all branches so that
the Credit Plans become operational on time.
b) A special BLBC meeting is convened for each block where the BCPs are
discussed and aggregated to form the Block Credit Plan. The DDM and the
LDM guide the BLBC in finalizing the plan, ensuring that the Block Credit Plan
is in tune with the potentials identified activity-wise, including in respect of
Government Sponsored Schemes.
c) All the Block Credit Plans of the district are aggregated by the LDM to form the
District Credit Plan (DCP). This plan indicates an analytical assessment of the
credit needs of the district to be deployed by all the financial institutions
operating in the district and the total quantum of funds to be earmarked as credit
by all the financial institutions for a new financial year. The Zonal/Controlling
Offices of banks, while finalizing their business plans for the year, should take
into account the commitments made in the DCP which should be ready well in
time before the performance budgets are finalized.
d) The DCP is then placed before the DCC by the Lead District Manager for final
acceptance/approval. All the DCPs are eventually aggregated into a State Level
Credit Plan to be prepared by the SLBC Convenor Bank and launched by the
1st of April every year.
e) The corporate business targets for branches, blocks, districts and states may
be aligned with the Annual Credit Plans (ACP) to ensure better implementation.
The Controlling Offices of the banks in each state should synchronize their
internal business plans with the ACP.

3.3 Monitoring the Performance of Credit Plans
The performance of the credit plans is reviewed in the various fora created under the
Lead Bank Scheme as shown below:
At Block Level Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC)
At District Level District Consultative Committee (DCC) & District
Level Review Committee (DLRC)
At State Level State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)
Monitoring of LBS by RBI - Monitoring Information System (MIS)
i) Data on ACP is an important element to review the flow of credit in the State. ACP
formats are aligned with the extant reporting guidelines on priority sector lending.
Accordingly, the ACP is to be prepared considering the categories of priority sector
that would include Agriculture, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Export Credit,
Education, Housing, Social Infrastructure, Renewable Energy and Others. The
definition of MSMEs will be as per Government of India (GoI), Gazette Notification
S.O. 2119 (E) dated June 26, 2020 read with circular RBI/2020-2021/10 FIDD.MSME
andNFS.BC.No.3/06.02.31/2020-21 read with FIDD.MSME and NFS. BC.
No.4/06.02.31/2020-21 dated July 2, 2020, August 21, 2020 respectively on ‘Credit
flow to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Sector’ and updated from time to time.
With a view to simplify the MIS Statements, it had been decided that the quarterly
statement on progress under ACP may be prepared in an all-inclusive single format -
MIS (Annex IV) containing data on (a) ACP targets (b) ACP achievements/
disbursements and (c) ACP sector/ sub-sector wise loan amount outstanding, for all
categories of LBS fora member banks viz. PSBs, PvSBs, RRBs, SFBs and Rural
Cooperative Banks (StCBs and DCCBs). The bank group wise statements as per the
prescribed format should be prepared and the same to be placed for meaningful review
in all DCC and SLBC meetings.
ii) In order to maintain consistency and integrity of data with the All-India data of SCBs
and facilitate a meaningful review/analysis of data, the ACP data needs to be grouped
separately for SCBs and other banks like State Cooperative Banks (StCBs), DCCBs,
etc. while presenting in the DCC/SLBC meetings and submitting to our Regional
Offices. The data pertaining to SCBs needs to be further grouped into public sector

banks, private sector banks, RRBs, and WOS of Foreign Banks to know the bank
group wise position.
3.4 Revised mechanism of Data Flow for LBS fora meetings
At present, discussions at the quarterly meetings of the various LBS fora viz. State
Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC), District level Consultative Committee (DCC) and
Block Level Bankers’ Committee (BLBC) primarily focus on the performance of banks
in the disbursement of loans vis-a-vis the allocated target under the Annual Credit
Plan. The integrity & timeliness of the data submitted by banks for the purpose has
been an issue as a significant portion of this data is manually compiled and entered
into the Data Management Systems of the SLBC Convenor Banks. The extent to which
this data corresponds with the data present in the Core Banking Solution (CBS) of the
respective banks also varies significantly. Therefore, there is need of a standardized
system to be developed on the website maintained by each SLBC to enable uploading
and downloading of the data pertaining to the Block, District as well as the State. The
relevant data must also be directly downloadable from the CBS and/ or MIS of the
banks with a view to keeping manual intervention to a minimal level in the process.
The procedure relating to the envisaged intervention in this area is given below:
Management of Data Flow at LBS Fora – Procedure
i. Each bank’s CBS should have a provision to generate a report pertaining to all LBS
related data/ tables to Excel. This data should have information pertaining to all the
branches operating in the state including fields/ columns for District and Block
name. Access to Download & Export this data from the bank’s CBS should be given
to the Controlling Offices of the banks who would be solely responsible for the
process of ‘Data Feeding’ for all districts/ blocks within their jurisdiction.
ii. The ‘Data Feeding’ process is the process of uploading this Excel file (downloaded
in step (i) above) on the SLBC websites. SLBC websites should have a provision
to ‘Import/ Upload’ all the data present in the Excel Sheet on the database of the
SLBC website. This would obviate any manual ‘data entry’ at the SLBC/ Controlling
Office level.

iii. To facilitate the above functionality, each SLBC Convenor Bank would have to add
this ‘Import/ Upload’ functionality to their SLBC website along with the requisite
capabilities at the back-end.
iv. The SLBC website would, thus, effectively work as a data aggregation platform.
Further, data analysis capabilities could also be added to the SLBC websites
depending on the available resources.
v. The SLBC websites should provide access to LDMs to download district and block
specific data directly from this website thus ensuring integrity and timely availability
of data.
vi. There could still be some data pertaining to State Government Schemes/ other
data that is not available on the CBS or MIS of the banks. This would have to be
collated at the Controlling Office level as is done now. At the SLBC website,
functionalities could be provided to enter this data too. This could then be
downloaded by the LDMs for district/ block level reports. Banks may also add Open
Format fields like ‘text boxes’ for data or information that is special or is entered/
used once in a while.
vii. Such a system ensures that LDMs & SLBC Convenor Banks have to do zero or
minimal data entry/ feeding and all data is entered by a single ‘custodian of data’
which is the Controlling Office of each bank. Any information to be provided by
Government extension agencies could also be similarly uploaded.
Necessary modifications may be made on the SLBC websites and to the CBS & MIS
systems of all banks to implement the envisaged data flow mechanism.
A Working Group of select SLBC Convenor banks and NABARD was constituted by
RBI to work out a standardised system for collection, storage, presentation and
management of data on the SLBC/ UTLBC website. A Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP), which may be followed by SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks, member banks and
LDMs, as suggested by the Working Group for management of the data flow is given
at Annex III.

4. Assignment of Lead Bank Responsibility
i) Lead Bank Scheme is administered by the Reserve Bank of India since 1969. The
assignment of Lead Bank responsibility to designated banks in every district is done
by the Reserve Bank of India following a detailed procedure formulated for this
purpose. As on March 31, 2025, 12 public sector banks and two private sector banks
(Jammu & Kashmir Bank and ICICI Bank) have been assigned Lead Bank
responsibility in 782 districts of the country.
ii) State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers' Committee
(UTLBC), as an apex level forum at the State/Union Territory (UT) level, coordinates
the activities of the financial institutions and Government departments in the
State/Union Territory under the Lead Bank Scheme. SLBC/UTLBC Convenorship is
assigned to banks for this purpose. As on March 31, 2025, the SLBC/ UTLBC
convenorship of 28 States and 8 Union Territories has been assigned to 11 public
sector banks and one private sector bank. A list of State/UT wise SLBC/UTLBC
Convenor Banks and district wise Lead Banks is given in Annex I.
iii) The Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) has been extended to the districts in the metropolitan
areas, thus bringing the entire country under the fold of the Lead Bank Scheme.
5. Banking Penetration
i) Over the years, the focus of the Lead Bank Scheme has shifted to inclusive growth
and financial inclusion. The use of Information Technology (IT) and intermediaries has
enabled banks to increase the outreach, scale and depth of banking services at
affordable cost.
ii) SLBC Convenor Banks/ Lead Banks are advised to focus attention on the need for
achieving 100% financial inclusion through penetration of banking services in the rural
areas. Revised guidelines on ‘Rationalisation of Branch Authorisation Policy’ issued
by the Department of Regulation (DoR), RBI on May 18, 2017 advised banks to
consider opening of a CBS-enabled banking outlet or a part time banking outlet, as
the case may be, in unbanked rural centres.
iii) SLBC Convenor Banks should take up with the State Governments/ other
Government departments concerned, impeders, such as, issues of road/digital
connectivity, conducive law and order situation, uninterrupted power supply, adequate

security, etc., for ensuring banking expansion at all centres where penetration by the
formal banking system is required. However, these impeders should not inhibit the
scaling up of financial inclusion initiatives.
5.1 Roadmap for providing banking services in unbanked villages
In November 2009, a roadmap to provide banking services in villages with population
more than 2000 was rolled out. All the identified villages have been provided with
banking services through branches, BCs or through other modes, such as, ATMs and
mobile vans. Later, in June 2012, a roadmap to provide banking services in unbanked
villages with less than 2000 population was rolled out. SLBC Convenor Banks and
Lead Banks were advised to complete the process of providing banking services in
unbanked villages with population below 2000 by August 14, 2015.
5.2 Roadmap for opening brick and mortar branches in villages with population
more than 5000 without a bank branch of a scheduled commercial bank
As brick and mortar branches are an integral component of financial inclusion, it was
decided to focus on villages with population above 5000 without a bank branch of a
SCB. This was to enable banks to provide quality financial services and timely support
to BC outlets that would help in sustaining and strengthening the services provided
through BCs and for ensuring close supervision of BC operations. Accordingly, SLBC
Convenor Banks were advised to identify villages with population above 5000 without
a branch of a SCB in their State and allot these villages among SCBs (including RRBs)
for opening of branches.
5.3 Aligning roadmap for unbanked villages having population more than 5000
with revised Guidelines on Branch Authorisation Policy
In terms of the DoR circular dated May 18, 2017 on ‘Rationalisation of Branch
Authorisation Policy - Revision of Guidelines’, final guidelines on ‘Banking Outlets’
have been issued to facilitate financial inclusion as also to provide flexibility to banks
on the choice of delivery channel. Accordingly, SLBC Convenor Banks have been
advised to identify all unbanked rural centres (URCs) in the State, compile and
maintain an updated list of all such centres. The updated list should be displayed on

the website of each SLBC to facilitate banks to choose/indicate the place/centre where
they wish to open a ‘banking outlet’.
ii) Further, SLBC Convenor Banks have been advised that in order to comply with the
criteria of opening at least 25 percent of total banking outlets in unbanked rural centres
in Tier 5 and 6 centres, as prescribed vide DoR circular dated May 18, 2017, banks
should give priority to villages without a banking outlet having population more than
5000 (i.e., Tier 5 centres) and ensure that all such villages under their jurisdiction are
covered with a CBS-enabled Banking Outlet on priority basis.
iii) The updated list of URCs should be tabled in all SLBC meetings during discussions
on the progress of providing banking services in unbanked rural centres.
5.4 National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024 – Universal
Access to Financial Services
Providing banking access to every village within a 5 KM radius/ hamlet of 500
households in hilly areas has been one of the key objectives of the National Strategy
for Financial Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024. Accordingly, SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor
Banks have been advised to review the presence of banking outlets of SCBs, RRBs,
Small Finance Banks (SFBs) and PBs in every village within a 5 KM radius/ hamlet of
500 households in hilly areas under their jurisdiction(s) and ensure that universal
access to financial services is provided to all such villages.
6. Credit Deposit Ratio (CD Ratio)
6.1 CD Ratio of Banks in Rural and Semi-Urban Areas
Banks have been advised to achieve a CD Ratio of 60 percent in respect of their rural
and semi-urban branches separately on an All-India basis. While it is not necessary
that this ratio should be achieved separately, branch-wise, district-wise or region-wise,
banks should, nevertheless, ensure that wide disparity in the ratios between different
States/ Regions is avoided to minimise regional imbalance in credit deployment. The
credit dispensation in certain districts is very low, due to various factors, such as, lack
of necessary infrastructure, varying ability of different regions to absorb credit, etc.
Banks may review the performance of their branches in such areas and take

necessary steps to augment credit flow. The Lead Banks may discuss the problem in
all its aspects with other financial institutions in the district and also in the DCC forum.
6.2 Implementation of the Recommendations of the Expert Group on CD Ratio
i) An Expert Group was constituted by the Government of India to go into the nature
and magnitude of the problem of low CD Ratio across States/ Regions and to suggest
steps to overcome the problem. The Expert Group examined the problems and causes
of low CD Ratio and made recommendations. As per the recommendations, the CD
Ratio of banks should be monitored at different levels based on the following
parameters:
Institution / Level Indicator
Individual Banks at Head Office Cu + RIDF
State Level (SLBC) Cu + RIDF
District Level Cs#
Where:
Cu = Credit as per place of Utilization
Cs# = Credit as per place of Sanction
RIDF = Total Resource support provided to States under RIDF
# In case of credit proposals received at district level but not sanctionable thereat due
to limitations of the sanctioning power and sanctioned at bank’s Head office/
controlling offices and the loan utilised / disbursed in districts through branches, are
treated as loan sanctioned and utilised at district level. Hence, it may be considered
at district level for computing CD ratio.
As regards calculation of CD ratio based on limit sanctioned/ amount outstanding, it is
clarified that the CD ratio may be calculated on the basis of amount outstanding.
Further, banks are advised that:
In districts having CD Ratio less than 40 percent, Special Sub-Committees (SSCs) of
the DCC shall be set up to monitor the CD Ratio.
• Districts having CD Ratio between 40 and 60 percent shall be monitored under
the existing system by the DCC, and
• The districts with CD Ratio less than 20 percent need to be treated on a special
footing.
ii) SSCs of the DCC should be set up in the districts having CD Ratio less than 40
percent, to monitor the CD Ratio and to draw up Monitorable Action Plans (MAPs) to

increase the CD Ratio. The LDM is designated as the Convenor of the SSC which, in
addition to the District Co-ordinators of banks functioning in the area, should comprise
of the LDO of RBI, the DDM of NABARD, the District Planning Officer or a
representative of the Collector duly empowered to take decisions on behalf of the
district administration.
The functions of the SSC are as under:
• The SSCs should draw up MAPs for improving the CD Ratio in their districts on
a self-set graduated basis.
• For this purpose, the SSC should hold a special meeting immediately after its
constitution and based on various ground level parameters, set for itself, a
target for increasing the CD Ratio, initially for the current year. It will also, at the
same meeting, set a definite time frame to achieve CD Ratio more than 60
percent in annual increments.
• Consequent to the completion of this process, the target and time frame self-
set by the SSC should be placed before the DCC for approval.
• The plans for implementation must then be taken up by the SSC and monitored
assiduously, once in two months.
• The SSC should report the progress on the implementation of the plan to the
DCC on a quarterly basis and through them to the SLBC Convenor.
• Based on the feedback received from the DCC regarding the progress in
implementation of the MAPs, a consolidated report should be prepared by the
SSC and tabled at all SLBC meetings for discussion/ information.
iii) As regards the districts with CD Ratio less than 20 percent, these are generally
located in hilly, desert or inaccessible terrains and/ or those dependent solely on the
primary sector and/ or characterized by a breakdown of the law and order machinery.
In such areas, conventional methods are not likely to work unless the banking system
and the State Government come together in a specially meaningful way.
iv) While the framework for implementation for raising the CD Ratio in these districts
will be the same as in the case of districts with CD Ratio below 40 percent (i.e., setting
up of SSC etc.), the focus of attention and the level of efforts should be of a much
higher scale.
For this,
• All such districts should first be placed in a special category.

• Thereafter, the responsibility for increasing their CD Ratio should be taken by
banks and State Governments and the districts should be "adopted" by the
District Administration and the Lead Bank jointly.
• While banks would be responsible for credit disbursement, the State
Government would be required to give an upfront commitment regarding its
responsibilities for creation of identified rural infrastructure together with support
in creating an enabling environment for banks to lend and to recover their dues.
• Progress in the special category districts should be monitored at the district
level and reported to the corporate offices of the concerned banks.
• The Chairmen/ Managing Directors of banks should give special attention to
the CD Ratio in such districts.
7. Direct Benefit Transfer
DBT was rolled out by the Government of India in selected districts in January 2013.
It was expanded to other districts subsequently. SLBC Convenor Banks were advised
to co-ordinate with the Government authorities to implement DBT. Banks were advised
to include the status of the roll-out of DBT as a regular agenda item for discussion in
SLBC meetings as part of Financial Inclusion/ DBT implementation. As a prerequisite
to the implementation of DBT, every eligible individual should have a bank account.
Further, to make disbursements at the doorstep through the ICT-based BC model,
banking outlets either through brick & mortar branches or the branchless mode is
needed in all villages across the country. Hence, banks have been advised to:
• take steps to complete the opening of bank accounts and seeding of Aadhaar
numbers in all bank accounts.
• closely monitor the progress in seeding of Aadhaar number with the bank
accounts of beneficiaries.
• put in place a system to provide the beneficiary of the seeding request an
acknowledgement and send a confirmation of the seeding of Aadhaar number.
• form a DBT Implementation Co-ordination Committee, along with the State
Government department concerned at district level and review the seeding of
Aadhaar numbers in bank accounts.
• ensure that district and village wise names and other details of BCs engaged/
other arrangements made by the bank are displayed on the SLBC website.

• set up a Complaint Grievance Redressal mechanism in each bank and
nominate a Complaint Redressal Officer in each district, to redress the
grievances related to ‘seeding of Aadhaar number in bank accounts'.
Banks were further advised to ensure that opening of bank accounts and seeding of
Aadhaar numbers with existing or new accounts of eligible beneficiaries opened for
the purpose of DBT under social welfare schemes, was in conformity with the
provisions listed under Section 16 of the Master Direction - Know Your Customer
(KYC) Direction, 2016 (updated as on May 10, 2021) and extant provisions of the
Prevention of Money Laundering (PML) Rules.
8. Service Area Approach (SAA)
i) The Service Area Approach (SAA) introduced in April 1989 for planned and orderly
development of rural and semi-urban areas was applicable to all SCBs including
RRBs. Under SAA, each bank branch in a rural or semi-urban area was designated to
serve an area of 15 to 25 villages and the branch was responsible for meeting the
needs of bank credit of its service area. The primary objective of SAA was to increase
productive lending and forge effective linkages between bank credit, production,
productivity and increase in income levels.
ii) The SAA scheme was reviewed in December 2004 and it was decided to dispense
with the restrictive provisions of the scheme, while retaining the positive features of
the SAA, such as, credit planning and monitoring of the credit purveyance.
Accordingly, under SAA, the allocation of villages among the rural and semi-urban
branches of banks were made not applicable for lending except under Government
Sponsored Schemes. Thus, while the commercial banks and RRBs are free to lend in
any rural and semi-urban area, the borrowers have the choice of approaching any
branch for their credit requirements.
8.1 Dispensing with ‘No Due Certificate’
In order to ensure hassle free credit to all borrowers, especially in rural and semi-urban
areas and keeping in view the technological developments and the different ways
available with banks to avoid multiple financing, banks have been advised to dispense
with obtaining a ‘No Due Certificate’ from individual borrowers (including SHGs and
JLGs) in rural and semi-urban areas for all types of loans, including loans under
Government Sponsored Schemes, irrespective of the amount involved unless the

Government Sponsored Scheme itself provides for obtention of a ‘No Due Certificate’.
Further, it has been clarified that the policy of dispensing with a ‘No Due Certificate’
for lending by banks is also applicable to urban areas including metropolitan cities.
ii) Banks are encouraged to use an alternative framework of due diligence as part of
the credit appraisal exercise other than the ‘No Due Certificate’ which could, among
others, consist of one or more of the following:
• Credit history check through Credit Information Companies (CICs)
• Self-declaration or an affidavit from the borrower
• CERSAI registration
• Peer monitoring
• Information sharing among lenders
• Information search (writing to other lenders with an auto deadline)
iii) Banks are also advised to submit information/data to all CICs, as required in
terms of extant instructions issued by RBI.
9. Enhancing Farmers’ Income
i) The Government of India, in the Union Budget 2016-17, had announced its resolve
to double the income of farmers by 2022. Several steps were taken towards attaining
this objective, including setting up of an inter-ministerial committee for preparation of
a blue print for the same. This agenda was reiterated by the government in several
fora and acquired primacy from the point of view of rural and agricultural development.
ii) The strategy to achieve this goal, inter-alia, includes,
• Focus on irrigation with large budgets, with the aim of "per drop, more crop".
• Provision of quality seeds and nutrients based on soil health of each field.
• Investments in warehousing and cold chains to prevent post-harvest crop
losses.
• Promotion of value addition through food processing.
• Creation of a national farm market, removing distortions and development of
infrastructure such as e-platform across 585 stations.
• Strengthening of the crop insurance scheme to mitigate risks at affordable
cost.
• Promotion of ancillary activities like poultry, bee-keeping and fisheries.

• Diversification towards high value crops needs to be promoted at district level,
accordingly value chain needs to be developed for those high value crops.
• Creation of a Start-up Ecosystem in agriculture and allied sector.
• Promotion of organic farming in the country.
iii. Needless to emphasize that acceleration in income generation is significantly
dependent on better capital formation in agriculture. Towards this, banks should revisit
their documentation for crop loans, simplify them where required and ensure speedy
sanctioning and disbursal of loans within specified time limits.
iv. The Lead Bank Scheme, which ensures inter-departmental/ governmental
coordination in the financial sector, should, therefore, be leveraged to further the
objective of enhancing farmers’ Income. Lead Banks are accordingly advised to
ensure the following:
a. Work closely with NABARD in the preparation of Potential Linked Credit Plans
(PLPs) & Annual Credit Plans (ACPs) keeping the above strategy in
consideration
b. Include ‘Enhancing Farmers’ Income as a regular agenda under the LBS in
various fora such as SLBC, DCC, DLRC and BLBC
c. For monitoring and reviewing the progress, Lead Banks may use benchmarks
as may be provided by NABARD
d. Map the overall strategy as given in para 9 (ii) above to the agriculture/ agro-
ancillary lending plan of the bank.
10. Expanding and Deepening of Digital Payments Ecosystem
With a view to expanding and deepening the digital payments ecosystem, the SLBCs/
UTLBCs were advised to identify one district in their respective States/ UTs on a pilot
basis, in consultation with banks and stakeholders and allocate it to a bank with
significant footprint, which would endeavour to make the district 100% digitally
enabled. With this, every individual in the district would be able to make/ receive
payments digitally in a safe, secure, quick, affordable and convenient manner. SLBC/
UTLBC Convenor Banks were also advised to devise a time bound roadmap for all
branches of member banks (Public Sector Banks, Private Sector Banks, RRBs, SFBs
and PBs) located in the identified district(s) for on-boarding merchants/ traders/
businesses/ utility service providers to facilitate fully digital transactions. Further,

SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks were advised to constitute a Sub-Committee on
Digital Payments at the SLBC/ UTLBC level. Subsequently, SLBCs/ UTLBCs have
been advised to devise a timebound roadmap to cover all the districts in their
respective States/UTs and make them 100% digitally enabled.

Annex I
List of State/ UT-wise SLBC/ UTLBC Convenor Banks and district-wise Lead Banks
Sr. State / Union SLBC/UTLBC District District Lead Bank
No. Territory Convenor bank
1 Andhra Union Bank of India 1. Alluri Sitharama Union Bank of India
Pradesh Raju
2. Anakapalli Union Bank of India
3. Ananthapuramu Canara Bank
(earlier name –
Anantapur)
4. Annamayya State Bank of India
5. Bapatla Union Bank of India
6. Chittoor Indian Bank
7. Dr. B R Union Bank of India
Ambedkar
Konaseema
(earlier name –
Konaseema)
8. East Godavari Union Bank of India
9. Eluru Union Bank of India
10. Guntur Union Bank of India
11. Kakinada Union Bank of India
12. Krishna Indian Bank
13. Kurnool Canara Bank
14. Nandyal Union Bank of India
15. NTR Union Bank of India
16. Palnadu Union Bank of India
17. Parvathipuram State Bank of India
Manyam
18. Prakasam Canara Bank
19. Sri Potti Canara Bank
Sriramulu
Nellore (Earlier
name – Nellore)
20. Sri Sathya Sai Canara Bank
21. Srikakulam Union Bank of India
22. Tirupati Union Bank of India
23. Visakhapatnam State Bank of India
24. Vizianagaram State Bank of India
25. West Godavari Union Bank of India
26. Y.S.R (Earlier Canara Bank
Name –
Kadapa)
2 Arunachal State Bank of India 1. Anjaw State Bank of India
Pradesh 2. Changlang State Bank of India
3. Dibang Valley State Bank of India
4. East Kameng State Bank of India
5. East Siang State Bank of India

6. Kamle State Bank of India
7. Kra Daadi State Bank of India
8. Kurung Kumey State Bank of India
9. Leparada State Bank of India
10. Lohit State Bank of India
11. Longding State Bank of India
12. Lower Dibang State Bank of India
Valley
13. Lower Siang State Bank of India
14. Lower Subansiri State Bank of India
15. Namsai State Bank of India
16. Pakke Kessang State Bank of India
17. Papum Pare State Bank of India
18. Shi-Yomi State Bank of India
19. Siang State Bank of India
20. Tawang State Bank of India
21. Tirap State Bank of India
22. Upper Siang State Bank of India
23. Upper Subansiri State Bank of India
24. West Kameng State Bank of India
25. West Siang State Bank of India
3 Assam State Bank of India 1. Baksa State Bank of India
2. Barpeta UCO Bank
3. Biswanath Indian Bank
4. Bongaigaon State Bank of India
5. Cachar Punjab National Bank
6. Charaideo Punjab National Bank
7. Chirang State Bank of India
8. Darrang UCO Bank
9. Dhemaji Punjab National Bank
10. Dhubri UCO Bank
11. Dibrugarh Punjab National Bank
12. Goalpara UCO Bank
13. Golaghat Punjab National Bank
14. Hailakandi Punjab National Bank
15. Hojai State Bank of India
16. Jorhat Punjab National Bank
17. Kamrup UCO Bank
18. Kamrup Metro UCO Bank
19. Karbi Anglong State Bank of India
20. Kokrajhar UCO Bank
21. Lakhimpur Punjab National Bank
22. Majuli Punjab National Bank
23. Morigaon Punjab National Bank
24. Nagaon Punjab National Bank
25. Nalbari UCO Bank
26. North Cachar State Bank of India
Hills
27. Sivasagar Punjab National Bank

28. Sonitpur UCO Bank
29. South Salmara- UCO Bank
Mankachar
30. Sribhumi (earlier Punjab National Bank
name – Karimganj)
31. Tamulpur State Bank of India
32. Tinsukia Punjab National Bank
33. Udalguri State Bank of India
34. West Karbi State Bank of India
Anglong
4 Bihar State Bank of India 1. Araria State Bank of India
2. Arwal Punjab National Bank
3. Aurangabad Punjab National Bank
4. Banka UCO Bank
5. Begusarai UCO Bank
6. Bhabua (Kaimur) Punjab National Bank
7. Bhagalpur UCO Bank
8. Bhojpur (Arrah) Punjab National Bank
9. Buxar Punjab National Bank
10. Darbhanga Central Bank of India
11. East Central Bank of India
Champaran
12. Gaya Punjab National Bank
13. Gopalgunj Central Bank of India
14. Jamui State Bank of India
15. Jehanabad Punjab National Bank
16. Katihar Central Bank of India
17. Khagaria Union Bank of India
18. Kishanganj State Bank of India
19. Lakhisarai Punjab National Bank
20. Madhepura State Bank of India
21. Madhubani Central Bank of India
22. Monghyr UCO Bank
23. Muzaffarpur Central Bank of India
24. Nalanda Punjab National Bank
25. Nawada Punjab National Bank
26. Patna Punjab National Bank
27. Purnea State Bank of India
28. Rohtas Punjab National Bank
(Sasaram)
29. Saharsa State Bank of India
30. Samastipur Union Bank of India
31. Saran Central Bank of India
32. Sheikhpura Canara Bank
33. Sheohar Bank of Baroda
34. Sitamarhi Bank of Baroda
35. Siwan Central Bank of India
36. Supaul State Bank of India
37. Vaishali Central Bank of India

38. West Central Bank of India
Champaran
5 C hhattisgarh S tate Bank of India 1. Balod Bank of Baroda
2. Baloda Bazar State Bank of India
3. Balrampur Central Bank of India
4. Bastar State Bank of India
5. Bemetara State Bank of India
6. Bijapur State Bank of India
7. Bilaspur State Bank of India
8. Dantewada State Bank of India
9. Dhamtari Bank of Baroda
10. Durg Bank of Baroda
11. Gariaband Bank of Baroda
12. Gaurela-Pendra- State Bank of India
Marwahi
13. Janjgir Champa State Bank of India
14. Jashpur State Bank of India
15. Kabirdham State Bank of India
16. Kanker State Bank of India
17. Khairagarh- State Bank of India
Chhuikhadan-
Gandai
18. Kondagaon State Bank of India
19. Korba State Bank of India
20. Korea Central Bank of India
21. Mahasamund Bank of Baroda
22. Manendragarh- Central Bank of India
Chirmiri-Bharatpur
(MCB)
23. Mohla-Manpur- Bank of Baroda
Ambagarh Chouki
24. Mungeli State Bank of India
25. Narayanpur State Bank of India
26. Raigarh State Bank of India
27. Raipur Bank of Baroda
28. Rajnandgaon Bank of Baroda
29. Sakti State Bank of India
30. Sarangarh- State Bank of India
Bilaigarh
31. Sukma State Bank of India
32. Surajpur Central Bank of India
33. Surguja Central Bank of India
6 Goa State Bank of India 1. North Goa State Bank of India
2. South Goa State Bank of India
7 G ujarat B ank of Baroda 1. Ahmedabad State Bank of India
2. Amreli State Bank of India
3. Anand Bank of Baroda
4. Aravalli Bank of Baroda
5. Banaskantha Bank of Baroda

6. Bharuch Bank of Baroda
7. Bhavnagar State Bank of India
8. Botad Bank of Baroda
9. Chhota Udaipur Bank of Baroda
10. Dahod Bank of Baroda
11. Dangs Bank of Baroda
12. Devbhumi Bank of Baroda
Dwarka
13. Gandhinagar State Bank of India
14. Gir Somnath State Bank of India
15. Godhra Bank of Baroda
(PanchMahal)
16. Jamnagar State Bank of India
17. Junagadh State Bank of India
18. Kheda Bank of Baroda
19. Kutch (Bhuj) Bank of Baroda
20. Mahisagar Bank of Baroda
21. Mehsana Bank of Baroda
22. Morbi State Bank of India
23. Narmada Bank of Baroda
24. Navsari Bank of Baroda
25. Patan Bank of Baroda
26. Porbandar State Bank of India
27. Rajkot State Bank of India
28. Sabarkantha Bank of Baroda
29. Surat Bank of Baroda
30. Surendranagar State Bank of India
31. Tapi Bank of Baroda
32. Vadodara Bank of Baroda
33. Valsad Bank of Baroda
8 Haryana Punjab National 1. Ambala Punjab National Bank
Bank 2. Bhiwani Punjab National Bank
3. Charki Dadri Punjab National Bank
4. Faridabad Canara Bank
5. Fatehabad Punjab National Bank
6. Gurgaon Canara Bank
7. Hisar Punjab National Bank
8. Jhajjar Punjab National Bank
9. Jind Punjab National Bank
10. Kaithal Punjab National Bank
11. Karnal Punjab National Bank
12. Kurukshetra Punjab National Bank
13. Mahendragarh Punjab National Bank
14. Nuh Canara Bank
15. Palwal Punjab National Bank
16. Panchkula Punjab National Bank
17. Panipat Punjab National Bank
18. Rewari Punjab National Bank

19. Rohtak Punjab National Bank
20. Sirsa Punjab National Bank
21. Sonepat Punjab National Bank
22. Yamunanagar Punjab National Bank
9 Himachal UCO Bank 1. Bilaspur UCO Bank
Pradesh 2. Chamba State Bank of India
3. Hamirpur Punjab National Bank
4. Kangra Punjab National Bank
(Dharamshala)
5. Kinnaur (Peo) Punjab National Bank
6. Kullu Punjab National Bank
7. Lahaul & Spiti State Bank of India
(Kelyong)
8. Mandi Punjab National Bank
9. Shimla UCO Bank
10. Sirmaur UCO Bank
11. Solan UCO Bank
12. Una Punjab National Bank
10 Jharkhand Bank of India 1. Bokaro Bank of India
2. Chatra Bank of India
3. Deoghar State Bank of India
4. Dhanbad Bank of India
5. Dumka Indian Bank
6. East Singhbhum Bank of India
7. Garhwa State Bank of India
8. Giridih Bank of India
9. Godda Indian Bank
10. Gumla Bank of India
11. Hazaribag Bank of India
12. Jamtara State Bank of India
13. Khunti Bank of India
14. Koderma Bank of India
15. Letehar State Bank of India
16. Lohardaga Bank of India
17. Pakur State Bank of India
18. Palamu State Bank of India
19. Ramgarh Bank of India
20. Ranchi Bank of India
21. Sahibganj State Bank of India
22. Seraikela- Bank of India
Kharsawan
23. Simdega Bank of India
24. West Bank of India
Singhbhum
11 K arnataka Canara Bank 1. Bagalkote Canara Bank
2. Ballari Canara Bank
3. Belagavi Canara Bank
4. Bengaluru Rural Canara Bank
5. Bengaluru Urban Canara Bank

6. Bidar State Bank of India
7. Chamarajanagar State Bank of India
8. Chikkaballapur Canara Bank
9. Chikkamagaluru Union Bank of India
10. Chitradurga Canara Bank
11. Dakshina Canara Bank
Kannada
12. Davangere Canara Bank
13. Dharwad Bank of Baroda
14. Gadag State Bank of India
15. Hassan Canara Bank
16. Haveri Bank of Baroda
17. Kalaburagi State Bank of India
18. Kodagu Union Bank of India
19. Kolar Canara Bank
20. Koppal State Bank of India
21. Mandya Bank of Baroda
22. Mysuru State Bank of India
23. Raichur State Bank of India
24. Ramanagara Union Bank of India
25. Shivamogga Canara Bank
26. Tumakuru State Bank of India
27. Udupi Canara Bank
28. Uttar Kannada Canara Bank
29. Vijayanagara State Bank of India
30. Vijayapura Canara Bank
31. Yadgir State Bank of India
12 Kerala Canara Bank 1. Alappuzha State Bank of India
2. Ernakulam State Bank of India
3. Idukki State Bank of India
4. Kannur Canara Bank
5. Kasaragod Canara Bank
6. Kollam Indian Bank
7. Kottayam State Bank of India
8. Kozhikode Canara Bank
9. Malappuram Canara Bank
10. Palakkad Canara Bank
11. Pathanamthitta State Bank of India
12. Indian Overseas Bank
Thiruvananthapuram
13. Thrissur Canara Bank
14. Wayanad Canara Bank
(Kalepetta)
13 Madhya Central Bank of 1. Agar-Malwa Bank of India
P radesh I ndia 2. Alirajpur Bank of Baroda
3. Anuppur Central Bank of India
4. Ashoknagar State Bank of India
5. Balaghat Central Bank of India
6. Barwani Bank of India

7. Betul Central Bank of India
8. Bhind Central Bank of India
9. Bhopal Bank of India
10. Burhanpur Bank of India
11. Chhatarpur State Bank of India
12. Chhindwara Central Bank of India
13. Damoh State Bank of India
14. Datia Punjab National Bank
15. Dewas Bank of India
16. Dhar Bank of India
17. Dindori Central Bank of India
18. East Nimar Bank of India
(Khandwa)
19. Guna State Bank of India
20. Gwalior Central Bank of India
21. Harda State Bank of India
22. Hoshangabad Central Bank of India
23. Indore Bank of India
24. Jabalpur Central Bank of India
25. Jhabua Bank of Baroda
26. Katni State Bank of India
27. Maihar Indian Bank
28. Mandla Central Bank of India
29. Mandsaur Central Bank of India
30. Mauganj Union Bank of India
31. Morena Central Bank of India
32. Narsinghpur Central Bank of India
33. Neemuch State Bank of India
34. Niwari State Bank of India
35. Pandhurna Central Bank of India
36. Panna State Bank of India
37. Raisen Central Bank of India
38. Rajgarh Bank of India
39. Ratlam Central Bank of India
40. Rewa Union Bank of India
41. Sagar Central Bank of India
42. Satna Indian Bank
43. Seoni State Bank of India
44. Shahdol Central Bank of India
45. Shajapur Bank of India
46. Sheopur Kala State Bank of India
47. Shivpuri State Bank of India
48. Sidhi Union Bank of India
49. Sihore Bank of India
50. Singrauli Union Bank of India
51. Tikamgarh State Bank of India
52. Ujjain Bank of India
53. Umaria State Bank of India

54. Vidisha State Bank of India
55. West Nimar Bank of India
(Khargone)
14 Maharashtra Bank of 1. Ahmednagar Central Bank of India
Maharashtra 2. Akola Central Bank of India
3. Amravati Central Bank of India
4. Beed State Bank of India
5. Bhandara Bank of India
6. Buldhana Central Bank of India
7. Chandrapur Bank of India
8. Chhatrapati Bank of Maharashtra
Sambhajinagar
9. Dharashiv State Bank of India
10. Dhule Central Bank of India
11. Gadchiroli Bank of India
12. Gondia Bank of India
13. Hingoli State Bank of India
14. Jalgaon Central Bank of India
15. Jalna Bank of Maharashtra
16. Kolhapur Bank of India
17. Latur State Bank of India
18. Mumbai City Bank of Baroda
19. Mumbai Bank of Baroda
Suburban
20. Nagpur Bank of India
21. Nanded State Bank of India
22. Nandurbar State Bank of India
23. Nashik Bank of Maharashtra
24. Palghar Bank of Maharashtra
25. Parbhani State Bank of India
26. Pune Bank of Maharashtra
27. Raigad Bank of India
28. Ratnagiri Bank of India
29. Sangli Bank of India
30. Satara Bank of Maharashtra
31. Sindhudurg Bank of India
32. Solapur Bank of India
33. Thane Bank of Maharashtra
34. Wardha Bank of India
35. Washim State Bank of India
36. Yavatmal Central Bank of India
15 M anipur S tate Bank of India 1. Bishnupur Punjab National Bank
2. Chandel State Bank of India
3. Churachandpur State Bank of India
4. Imphal East Punjab National Bank
5. Imphal West State Bank of India
6. Jiribam Punjab National Bank
7. Kakching State Bank of India

8. Kamjong Punjab National Bank
9. Kangpokpi State Bank of India
10. Noney Punjab National Bank
11. Pherzawal State Bank of India
12. Senapati State Bank of India
13. Temenglong Punjab National Bank
14. Tengnoupal Punjab National Bank
15. Thoubal State Bank of India
16. Ukhrul Punjab National Bank
16 Meghalaya State Bank of India 1. East Garo hills State Bank of India
2. East Jaintia Hills State Bank of India
3. East Khasi Hills State Bank of India
4. Eastern West Punjab National Bank
Khasi Hills
5. North Garo Hills State Bank of India
6. Ri Bhoi State Bank of India
7. South Garo Hills State Bank of India
8. South West Garo State Bank of India
Hills
9. South West Khasi State Bank of India
Hills
10. West Garo hills State Bank of India
11. West Jaintia State Bank of India
Hills
12. West Khasi Hills State Bank of India
17 Mizoram State Bank of India 1. Aizawl State Bank of India
2. Champhai State Bank of India
3. Hnahthial State Bank of India
4. Khawzawl State Bank of India
5. Kolasib State Bank of India
6. Lawngtlai State Bank of India
7. Lunglei State Bank of India
8. Mamit State Bank of India
9. Saitual State Bank of India
10. Serchhip State Bank of India
11. Siaha State Bank of India
18 Nagaland State Bank of India 1. Chumoukedima Bank of Baroda
2. Dimapur State Bank of India
3. Kiphire State Bank of India
4. Kohima State Bank of India
5. Longleng State Bank of India
6. Meluri State Bank of India
7. Mokokchung State Bank of India
8. Mon State Bank of India
9. Niuland State Bank of India
10. Noklak State Bank of India
11. Peren State Bank of India
12. Phek State Bank of India
13. Shamator State Bank of India

14. Tseminyu State Bank of India
15. Tuensang State Bank of India
16. Wokha State Bank of India
17. Zunheboto State Bank of India
19 O disha U CO Bank 1. Angul UCO Bank
2. Balasore UCO Bank
3. Bargah State Bank of India
4. Bhadrak UCO Bank
5. Bolangir State Bank of India
(Balangir)
6. Boudh State Bank of India
7. Cuttack UCO Bank
8. Deogarh State Bank of India
9. Dhenkanal UCO Bank
10. Gajapati Union Bank of India
11. Ganjam Union Bank of India
12. Jagatsinghpur UCO Bank
13. Jajpur State Bank of India
14. Jharsuguda State Bank of India
15. Kalahandi State Bank of India
16. Kandhamal State Bank of India
17. Kendrapara State Bank of India
18. Keonjhar Bank of India
19. Khurda State Bank of India
20. Koraput State Bank of India
21. Malkangiri State Bank of India
22. Mayurbhanj Bank of India
23. Nabarangpur State Bank of India
24. Nayagarh State Bank of India
25. Nuapada State Bank of India
26. Puri UCO Bank
27. Rayagada State Bank of India
28. Sambalpur State Bank of India
29. Sonepur State Bank of India
30. Sundargarh State Bank of India
20 Punjab Punjab National 1. Amritsar Punjab National Bank
Bank 2. Barnala State Bank of India
3. Bhatinda State Bank of India
4. Faridkot Punjab & Sind Bank
5. Fategarh Sahib State Bank of India
6. Fazilka Punjab National Bank
7. Ferozepur Punjab National Bank
8. Gurdaspur Punjab National Bank
9. Hoshiarpur Punjab National Bank
10. Jalandhar UCO Bank
11. Kapurthala Punjab National Bank
12. Ludhiana Punjab & Sind Bank
13. Malerkotla State Bank of India

14. Mansa State Bank of India
15. Moga Punjab & Sind Bank
16. Muktsar State Bank of India
17. Nawanshahr Punjab National Bank
18. Pathankot Punjab National Bank
19. Patiala State Bank of India
20. Ropar UCO Bank
21. Sahibzada Ajit Punjab National Bank
Singh Nagar
(Mohali)
22. Sangrur State Bank of India
23. Tarn Taran Punjab National Bank
21 R ajasthan B ank of Baroda 1. Ajmer Bank of Baroda
2. Alwar Punjab National Bank
3. Anupgarh Punjab National Bank
4. Balotra State Bank of India
5. Banswara Bank of Baroda
6. Baran Central Bank of India
7. Barmer State Bank of India
8. Beawar Bank of Baroda
9. Bharatpur Punjab National Bank
10. Bhilwara Bank of Baroda
11. Bikaner State Bank of India
12. Bundi Bank of Baroda
13. Chittorgarh Bank of Baroda
14. Churu Bank of Baroda
15. Dausa UCO Bank
16. Deeg Punjab National Bank
17. Dholpur Punjab National Bank
18. Didwana- UCO Bank
Kuchaman
19. Dudu UCO Bank
20. Dungarpur Bank of Baroda
21. Gangapur City Bank of Baroda
22. Hanumangarh State Bank of India
23. Jaipur Punjab National Bank
24. Jaipur Rural State Bank of India
25. Jaisalmer State Bank of India
26. Jalore State Bank of India
27. Jhalawar Central Bank of India
28. Jhunjhunu Bank of Baroda
29. Jodhpur Punjab National Bank
30. Jodhpur Rural ICICI Bank
31. Kekri Bank of Baroda
32. Khairthal-Tijara Punjab National Bank
33. Karauli Bank of Baroda
34. Kota Central Bank of India
35. Kotputli-Behror Punjab National Bank

36. Nagaur UCO Bank
37. Neem Ka Thana State Bank of India
38. Pali State Bank of India
39. Phalodi UCO Bank
40. Pratapgarh Bank of Baroda
41. Rajsamand State Bank of India
42. Salumber ICICI Bank
43. Sanchore State Bank of India
44. Sawai Madhopur Bank of Baroda
45. Shahpura Bank of Baroda
46. Sikar Punjab National Bank
47. Sirohi State Bank of India
48. Sri Ganganagar Punjab National Bank
49. Tonk Bank of Baroda
50. Udaipur State Bank of India
22 Sikkim State Bank of India 1. Gangtok (Earlier State Bank of India
Name - East Sikkim)
2. Gyalshing (Earlier State Bank of India
Name - West
Sikkim)
3. Mangan (Earlier State Bank of India
Name - North
Sikkim)
4. Namchi (Earlier State Bank of India
Name - South
Sikkim)
5. Pakyong Central Bank of India
6. Soreng State Bank of India
23 T amil Nadu Indian Overseas 1. Ariyalur State Bank of India
B ank 2. Chengalpattu Indian Bank
3. Chennai Indian Overseas Bank
4. Coimbatore Canara Bank
5. Cuddalore Indian Bank
6. Dharmapuri Indian Bank
7. Dindigul Canara Bank
8. Erode Canara Bank
9. Kallakurichi Indian Bank
10. Kanchipuram Indian Bank
11. Kanyakumari Indian Overseas Bank
12. Karur Indian Overseas Bank
13. Krishnagiri Indian Bank
14. Madurai Canara Bank
15. Mayiladuthurai Indian Overseas Bank
16. Nagapattinam Indian Overseas Bank
17. Namakkal Indian Bank
18. Nilgiris Canara Bank
19. Perambalur Indian Overseas Bank
20. Puddukottai Indian Overseas Bank

21. Indian Overseas Bank
Ramanathapuram
22. Ranipet Indian Bank
23. Salem State Bank of India
24. Sivaganga Indian Overseas Bank
25. Tenkasi Indian Overseas Bank
26. Thanjavur Indian Overseas Bank
27. Theni Canara Bank
28. Tiruchirapalli Indian Overseas Bank
29. Tirunelveli Indian Overseas Bank
30. Tirupathur Indian Bank
31. Tiruppur Canara Bank
32. Tiruvallur Indian Bank
33. Tiruvannamalai Indian Bank
34. Tiruvarur Indian Overseas Bank
35. Tuticorin State Bank of India
36. Vellore Indian Bank
37. Viluppuram Indian Bank
38. Virudhunagar Indian Overseas Bank
24 Telangana State Bank of India 1. Adilabad State Bank of India
2. Bhadradri State Bank of India
3. Hanumakonda State Bank of India
(earlier name -
Warangal (Urban))
4. Hyderabad State Bank of India
5. Jagitial Union Bank of India
6. Jangaon (New) State Bank of India
7. Jayashankar State Bank of India
8. Jogulamba Union Bank of India
9. Kamareddy Canara Bank
10. Karimnagar State Bank of India
11. Khammam State Bank of India
12. Komram Bheem State Bank of India
13. Mahabubabad State Bank of India
14. Mahabubnagar State Bank of India
15. Mancherial Union Bank of India
16. Medak State Bank of India
17. Medchal- Canara Bank
Malkajgiri
18. Mulugu State Bank of India
19. Nagarkurnool Union Bank of India
20. Nalgonda State Bank of India
21. Narayanpet State Bank of India
22. Nirmal State Bank of India
23. Nizamabad State Bank of India
24. Peddapalli Union Bank of India
25. Rajanna Union Bank of India
26. Ranga Reddy State Bank of India
27. Sangareddy Canara Bank

28. Siddipet Union Bank of India
29. Suryapet State Bank of India
30. Vikarabad State Bank of India
31. Wanaparthy Union Bank of India
32. Warangal Union Bank of India
(earlier name -
Warangal (Rural))
33. Yadadri Canara Bank
25 Tripura Punjab National 1. Dhalai Punjab National Bank
Bank 2. Gomati Punjab National Bank
3. Khowai Punjab National Bank
4. North Tripura Punjab National Bank
5. Sepahijala Punjab National Bank
6. South Tripura Punjab National Bank
7. Unakoti Punjab National Bank
8. West Tripura Punjab National Bank
26 Uttarakhand State Bank of India 1. Almora State Bank of India
2. Bageshwar State Bank of India
3. Chamoli State Bank of India
4. Champawat State Bank of India
5. Dehradun Punjab National Bank
6. Haridwar Punjab National Bank
7. Nainital Bank of Baroda
8. Pauri Garwal State Bank of India
9. Pithoragarh State Bank of India
10. Rudraprayag State Bank of India
11. Tehri Garhwal State Bank of India
(New Tehri)
12. Udham Singh Bank of Baroda
Nagar
13. Uttar Kashi State Bank of India
27 U ttar Pradesh B ank of Baroda 1. Agra Canara Bank
2. Aligarh Canara Bank
3. Allahabad Bank of Baroda
4. Ambedkar Nagar Bank of Baroda
5. Auraiya Central Bank of India
6. Azamgarh Union Bank of India
7. Baghpat Canara Bank
8. Bahraich Indian Bank
9. Ballia Central Bank of India
10. Balrampur Indian Bank
11. Banda Indian Bank
12. Barabanki Bank of India
13. Bareilly Bank of Baroda
14. Basti State Bank of India
15. Bhim Nagar Canara Bank
16. Bijnor Punjab National Bank
17. Budaun Punjab National Bank
18. Bulandshahr Punjab National Bank

19. Chandauli Union Bank of India
20. Chhtrapati Bank of Baroda
Sahuji Maharaj
Nagar
21. Chitrakoot Indian Bank
22. Deoria Central Bank of India
23. Etah Canara Bank
24. Etawah Central Bank of India
25. Faizabad Bank of Baroda
26. Farukhabad Bank of India
27. Fatehpur Bank of Baroda
28. Firozabad State Bank of India
29. Gautam Buddha Canara Bank
Nagar
30. Ghaziabad Canara Bank
31. Ghazipur Union Bank of India
32. Gonda Indian Bank
33. Gorakhpur State Bank of India
34. Hamirpur Indian Bank
35. Hardoi Bank of India
36. Jalaun Indian Bank
37. Jaunpur Union Bank of India
38. Jhansi Punjab National Bank
39. Jyotiba Phule Canara Bank
Nagar (Amroha)
40. Kannauj Bank of India
41. Kanpur Dehat- Bank of Baroda
Rural
42. Kanpur Nagar- Bank of Baroda
Urban
43. Kansi Ram Canara Bank
Nagar (Kasganj)
44. Kaushambi Bank of Baroda
45. Kushi Nagar Central Bank of India
(Padrauna)
46. Lakhimpur-Kheri Indian Bank
47. Lalitpur Punjab National Bank
48. Lucknow Bank of India
49. Mahamaya Canara Bank
Nagar (Hathras)
50. Maharajganj State Bank of India
51. Mahoba Indian Bank
52. Mainpuri Bank of India
53. Mathura Canara Bank
54. Mau (Mau Nath Union Bank of India
Bahnjan)
55. Meerut Canara Bank
56. Mirzapur Indian Bank
57. Moradabad Canara Bank

58. Muzaffarnagar Punjab National Bank
59. Panchsheel Canara Bank
Nagar
60. Pilibhit Bank of Baroda
61. Prabudh Nagar Punjab National Bank
(Shamli)
62. Pratapgarh Bank of Baroda
63. Rae Bareli Bank of Baroda
64. Rampur Bank of Baroda
65. Saharanpur Punjab National Bank
66. Sant Kabir State Bank of India
Nagar
67. Sant Ravidas Union Bank of India
Nagar (Bhadohi)
68. Shahjahanpur Bank of Baroda
69. Shravasti Indian Bank
70. Siddharth nagar State Bank of India
71. Sitapur Indian Bank
72. Sonbhadra Indian Bank
73. Sultanpur Bank of Baroda
74. Unnao Bank of India
75. Varanasi Union Bank of India
28 West Bengal Punjab National 1. Alipurduar Central Bank of India
Bank 2. Bankura Punjab National Bank
3. Birbhum UCO Bank
4. Cooch Behar Central Bank of India
5. Dakshin Dinajpur Punjab National Bank
6. Darjeeling Central Bank of India
7. Hooghly UCO Bank
8. Howrah UCO Bank
9. Jalpaiguri Central Bank of India
10. Jhargram Punjab National Bank
11. Kalimpong State Bank of India
12. Kolkata State Bank of India
13. Malda Punjab National Bank
14. Murshidabad Punjab National Bank
15. Nadia Punjab National Bank
16. North 24 Indian Bank
Parganas
17. Paschim State Bank of India
Bardhaman
18. Pashchim Punjab National Bank
Medinapur
19. Purba UCO Bank
Bardhaman
20. Purba Punjab National Bank
Medinapur
21. Purulia Punjab National Bank

22. South 24 Punjab National Bank
Parganas
23. Uttar Dinajpur Punjab National Bank
29 Andaman & State Bank of India 1. Nicobar Islands State Bank of India
Nicobar 2. North & Middle State Bank of India
Islands Andaman
3. South Andaman State Bank of India
30 Chandigarh Punjab National 1. Chandigarh Punjab National Bank
Bank (Rural)
31 Dadra and Bank of Baroda 1. Dadra and Nagar Bank of Baroda
Nagar Haveli Haveli
and Daman 2. Daman State Bank of India
a nd Diu 3. Diu State Bank of India
32 D elhi Punjab National 1. Central Delhi Canara Bank
B ank 2. East Delhi Punjab National Bank
3. New Delhi Canara Bank
4. North Delhi Punjab National Bank
5. North East Delhi Punjab National Bank
6. North West Delhi Punjab National Bank
7. Shahdara Bank of Baroda
8. South Delhi State Bank of India
9. South East Delhi State Bank of India
10.South West Delhi State Bank of India
11. West Delhi Canara Bank
33 Jammu and The Jammu & 1. Anantnag J & K Bank Ltd.
Kashmir Kashmir Bank Ltd. 2. Bandipora J & K Bank Ltd.
3. Baramulla J & K Bank Ltd.
4. Budgam J & K Bank Ltd.
5. Doda State Bank of India
6. Ganderbal J & K Bank Ltd.
7. Jammu State Bank of India
8. Kathua State Bank of India
9. Kishtwar State Bank of India
10. Kulgam J & K Bank Ltd.
11. Kupwara J & K Bank Ltd.
12. Poonch J & K Bank Ltd.
13. Pulwama J & K Bank Ltd.
14. Rajouri J & K Bank Ltd.
15. Ramban State Bank of India
16. Reasi State Bank of India
17. Samba State Bank of India
18. Shopian J & K Bank Ltd.
19. Srinagar J & K Bank Ltd.
20. Udhampur State Bank of India
34 Ladakh State Bank of India 1. Kargil State Bank of India
2. Leh State Bank of India
35 Lakshadweep Canara Bank 1. Lakshadweep Canara Bank
36 Puducherry Indian Bank 1. Puducherry Indian Bank

Annex II
SLBC/UTLBC Website- Indicative List of contents
Menu item Sub Menu Contents Annex
SLBC as a coordinating forum for the
About us Background development of the state and its functioning -
Brief write up
SLBC members with their names and contact
SLBC-Members II-1
details
Each district may be linked to the respective
Geographical district website of GOI at NIC portal so as to
State Profile
Map get district details on clicking the respective
district name
Infrastructure Power, Transport, Roads & Rail etc
Acreage under cultivation, Cropping pattern,
Irrigation facilities, Farm mechanisation,
Agriculture
allied activities, Dairy, Fisheries, Plantation,
Horticulture etc,
Industrialisation, Status of MSME, Sickness
Industries
of MSME, Reasons, Rehabilitation
Position of banked villages as compared to
Banking II-2
total villages in each of the districts
SLBC Calendar of Schedule of SLBC meetings for the current
II-3
meetings meetings calendar year
SLBC-Meetings Details of SLBC meetings held with agenda
II-4
held and minutes
Lead Bank Lead Banks- Details of Lead Banks with names of LDM
II-5
Scheme District wise and their contact details
ACP-Targets Annual Credit Plan - Targets for the year II-6
ACP- Annual Credit Plan - Sector wise
II-7
Achievements achievement
CD Ratio Position of district wise CD ratio II-8
Central Brief description of each Central Government
Govt
Government sponsored programme. The Central
Sponsored
Sponsored Government sponsored scheme is to be
Programmes
programmes linked to RBI/GoI guidelines
State
Government Brief description of each State Government
Sponsored sponsored programme.
programmes
Banking
Banking
Network- Mode of Banking Services II-9
Network
Summary
Banking outlets-
Branches- District wise particulars of branches II-10
details
Banking outlets-
District wise particulars of BC outlets II-11
BCs-details
Particulars of
District wise banking services provided
Banking II-12
through Other Modes
Services

through Other
Modes
Financial SHG bank Bank wise position of savings and credit
II-13
Inclusion linkage linked number of SHGs
FLCs Database on FLCs II-14
RSETIs District wise position of RSETIs II-15
Submission Web based Submission of data by Lead Banks and
of data interface controlling office of banks to SLBC
Link to RBI, NABARD, respective State
Links to related
Links Government, IBA, Banking Ombudsman,
website
Banks and other related websites

Annex II-1
SLBC-List of Members
Updated as on -----
SR Name Designation Organisation Contact Details Remarks
Tel email Address

Annex II-2
Banking services-Villages covered
Quarter ended -----
SR District District Total no. of Villages No. of villages which Remarks
Name Code are having banking
(BSR) outlets
(BR/BC/Other)
1 >2000 <2000 >5000 >2000 <2000 >5000
TOTAL

Annex II-3
SLBC -Calendar of meetings for the calendar year --------
SR Year Quarter Scheduled Date of Remarks
meeting
1 dd.mm.yyyy

Annex II-4
SLBC - Details of meetings held
SR SLBC Date of Attended by (Name & Minutes Schedul Re
meeting meeting Designation) of the ed date mar
no.* -Agenda meeting of ks
linked meeting
as per
calendar
RBI Convenor GOI State
Bank Govt
dd.mm.y dd.mm.yy
1 yyy minutes yy
* SLBC meetings held after April 2010

Annex II-5
Details of Lead Banks
Quarter ended -----
SR District District Name of Name Designation Contact Details Rem
Name code Lead of LDM arks
(BSR) Bank
Tel email Address

Annex II-6
Annual Credit Plan-Targets for the year --------
District Name (Amount in thousands)
S Bank Ag M Exp Ed Ho Social Rene O Priorit Non- Total
R Name ric S ort uca usi Infras wable th y- Prio
ult M Cre tion ng tructu Energ er Subto rity
ure E dit re y s tal
Commer
cial
Banks-
Sub Total
RRBs-
Sub Total
Cooperat
ive
Banks-
Sub Total
Small
Finance
Banks-
Sub Total
Wholly
Owned
Subsidiar
ies
(WOS) of
Foreign
Banks-
Sub-
Total
All
banks-
Total

Annex II-7
Annual Credit Plan - Achievement
Quarter ended ----- (Amount in thousands)
S Bank Name Agri M Exp Edu Ho Soc Ren Ot Pri No Tot
R cult S ort cati usi ial ewa he orit n- al
ure M Cre on ng Infr ble rs y- Pri
E dit astr Ener Su orit
uct gy bto y -
ure tal
Commercial
Banks-Sub
Total
RRBs-Sub
Total
Cooperative
Banks-Sub
Total
Small
Finance
Banks-Sub
Total
Wholly
Owned
Subsidiaries
(WOS) of
Foreign
Banks-Sub
Total
All banks-
Total

Annex II-8
Credit Deposit Ratio
Quarter ended ------- (Amount in thousands)
SR District District Deposit Credit CD Ratio Remarks
Name code

Annex II-9
Banking Network-Summary
Quarter ended -----
SR Bank Name Mode of Banking Services Remarks
Other
1 Branch BC Modes Total
Commercial
Banks-Sub Total
RRBs-Sub Total
Cooperative
Banks-Sub Total
Small Finance
Banks-Sub Total
Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries
(WOS) of
Foreign Banks-
Sub Total
Payments
Banks-Sub Total
All banks-Total

Annex II-10
Particulars of Banking outlets- Branches
Quarter ended -----
SR Distric Distric Block Localit Populatio Bank Branc Date of Contac Add Re
t t y/Villag n Name h openin t res ma
Name Code( e classificat Name g Details s rks
BSR) ion
(M/U/SU/R
)
dd.mm.
1 yyyy

Annex II-11
Particulars of Banking outlets- BCs
Quarter ended -----
S District Blo Local Populat Bank Base Date Na Tel no. Rem
R Name ck ity/ ion Name Branch of me of BC arks
Villa classifi Name openi of
ge cation ng of BC
(M/U/S BC
U/R) outlet
dd.mm
1 .yyyy

Annex II-12
Particulars of Banking Services provided through Other Modes
Quarter ended -----
S Distri Bloc Loc Populat Bank Specify Date Name Tel no. Rem
R ct k ality ion Nam Type of of of of arks
Nam / classifi e mode open Contact Contact
e Vill cation (Rural ing Official Official
age (M/U/S ATM/
U/R) Mobile
van/
Other
dd.m
m.yyy
1 y

Annex II-13
SHG bank linkage programme
Quarter ended ----- (No. in actuals, Amount in thousands)
SR Bank Name Savings linked Credit Linked
No. of Amount No. of Amount
SHGs outstanding SHGs outstanding
Commercial Banks-Sub Total
RRBs-Sub Total
Cooperative Banks-Sub
Total
Small Finance Banks-Sub
Total
Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
(WOS) of Foreign Banks-Sub
Total
All banks-Total

Annex II-14
Database on FLCs
Wheth
Premise er Run
Locatio
s (Bank by
n
branch, Trust Name(s)
FLC Date of (Metro, Addre Spon Cont
Distric LDM or run of FL FLC
Cod openin Urban, ss of sor act Email
t office, directl Counsello Helpline
e* g Semi- FLC Bank No(s)
RSETI, y by r(s)
urban
Indepen spons
or rural)
dent) or
bank
*Note: FLC Code will be a unique five digit code with the first three digits being the district
code (Refer sheet titled District Master) and the last two digits represent the FLC Code to
be given by SLBC Convenor banks starting from 01 and running sequentially thereafter for
each district (For eg. if there are four FLCs in a district, the FLC code will be in the form
xxx01, xxx02, xxx03 and xxx04 where xxx represents the district code as per district master
sheet)

Annex II-15
Position of RSETI
Quarter ended -----
SR District Location Sponsoring Date of Name Contact Details Rema
of RSETI Bank opening of rks
Contact
official
1 Tel email Address

Annex III
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Data Flow at LBS Fora
i. Head Office (HO) of each bank shall generate the report, pertaining to LBS related
data and data available on CBS/ MIS, in the prescribed format, which includes
columns of District Name, Block name, District code & Block code by 15th of
succeeding month following the end of the quarter.
ii. HO of each bank shall provide the district & block level report in prescribed format
to controlling offices of bank working at state level.
iii. Each SLBC shall ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is having a
provision for uploading the data by controlling offices of each bank in prescribed
format.
iv. Each Banks’ Controlling Office at state level responsible to feed the data in
respective state shall upload the data in SLBC portal by 20th of succeeding month
of the end of the quarter.
v. Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which are not available on CBS
or MIS of the bank) would be collated & uploaded by Controlling Office/ Lead
District Manager (LDM) as is being done now, in SLBC web portal by 20th of
succeeding month of the end of the quarter.
vi. SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to LDMs of respective state on
SLBC web portal to download the block wise data of their respective district.
vii. SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to controlling office of respective
state on SLBC web portal to download the uploaded data to verify the correctness
of data.
Role of Banks’ Head Offices
• Banks’ HOs shall generate the district wise and block wise data of each state in
the prescribed format.
• Banks’ HOs shall ensure that the mapping of their branches to the block level has
been carried out.
• HO of each bank shall provide the report in prescribed format to controlling office
of bank working at state level.
• The state code, district code & block code should be as per the Government of
India’s census 2011 data.

• The amount column in the report should be provided in the actual figure and not it
lakhs, crores, billions or millions etc.
Role of Controlling Office of Bank working at state level
• Each Banks’ controlling office at state level responsible to feed the data in
respective state must upload the data in SLBC portal of that state.
• For Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which is not available on
CBS or MIS of the bank), controlling office of the bank at state level will collate the
data in format given by SLBC of that state & upload the same on the SLBC portal.
Role of SLBC Convenor Bank
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is
having a provision for uploading the data in approved format by controlling office
of each bank working at state level.
• There are 29 formats (flat files) for the data pertains to CBS or available through
MIS of the bank.
• Other than formats mentioned above, there are 04 excel formats for data pertains
to FLCs & RSETI, which is required to be collected from the controlling office of
banks at state level.
• For Data pertaining to State Government/ Other data (which is not available on
CBS or MIS of the bank), SLBC Convenor bank may follow their existing procedure
or devise the new procedure.
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that LDMs are able to access web portal of
SLBC to download the block wise data of their respective district.
• SLBC Convenor bank should provide the access to controlling offices of banks of
respective state on SLBC web portal to download the uploaded data to verify the
correctness of data.
• SLBC Convenor bank must ensure that their data feeding website/web portal is
having a provision for uploading the block wise ACP target data in approved format
by LDMs of that state.

Role of Lead District Managers (LDMs)
• LDMs must upload the block wise ACP target of the district on SLBC portal of the
state, by 15th April of the starting of the financial year.
• LDMs shall download the block wise information of district for review purpose.
The flow chart describing the procedure to be followed in this regard is as follows.
FLOW CHART
Start
Each Banks’ controlling office of
Data pertain to LBS or particular state will collate &
available on CBS upload the data in website/web
NO portal of SLBC of that state
Yes concerned
HO of each bank will
generate the data in
approved format
HO of each bank will provide the district
& block level report in approved format
to controlling office of bank working at
state level.
Each SLBC should have facility in their
website/portal for uploading in
approved format by controlling office of
banks at state level
Each Banks’ controlling office of
particular state will upload the data in
website/web portal of that state.
LDMs of the state to be provided the
access to SLBC website/portal for
downloading the district and block
level data & uploading the yearly block
wise ACP target of the district, data like
RSETIs/ FLCs etc.
Complet e

LBS – MIS Annex IV
Statement showing Achievement vis-à-vis Targets under the Annual Credit Plan (ACP) for the quarter ended ____
Name of the State/Union Territory: No. of accounts in actuals, Amount in thousands
(A) Public Sector Banks (B) Private Sector Banks (C) Regional Rural Banks (D) Small Finance Banks
Total (A+B+C+D+E)
(E) Rural Cooperative Banks (StCBs and DCCBs)
Achievement Achievement
ACP Target (Fixed (Disbursement) upto % Achievement ACP Target (Fixed (Disbursement) upto % Achievement
Sr. No Sector Amount O/s Amount O/s
Annual) the end of current (Disbursement) Annual) the end of current (Disbursement)
quarter quarter
No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc.
1 Priority Sector (1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H)
1A Agriculture= 1A(i)+1A(ii)+1A (iii)
1A(i) Farm Credit
1A(ii) Agriculture Infrastructure
1A(iii) Ancillary Activities
Out of 1A(iii) above, loans upto 50 crore to Start-ups
engaged in Agri & Allied services
Out of Agriculture, loans to Small & Marginal Farmers
1B MSMEs = 1B(i)+1B(ii)+1B(iii)+1B(iv)
Micro Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service) (including
1B(i)
Khadi & Village Industries)
1B(ii) Small Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service)
1B(iii) Medium Enterprises (Manufacturing + Service)
Other finance to MSMEs (As indicated in Master
1B(iv)
Direction on PSL)
Out of 1B(iv) above, loans upto 50 crores to Start-ups)
1C Export Credit
1D Education
1E Housing
1F Social Infrastructure
1G Renewable Energy
1H Others
Out of 1H above, loans upto 50 crore to Start-ups (other
than Agri/ MSME)
Sub total Priority Sector Lending =
1A+1B+1C+1D+1E+1F+1G+1H
3 Loans to weaker Sections under PSL
Out of 3 above, loans to individual women beneficiaries
up to ₹1 lakh
4 Non-Priority Sector (4A+4B+4C+4D+4E)
4A Agriculture
4B Education
4C Housing
4D Personal Loans under Non-Priority Sector
4E Others
Sub-total Non-Priority Sector Lending =
4A+4B+4C+4D+4E
Total=2+5

Annex V
Compendium of instructions - District Level Review Committee (DLRC)
Preamble: The District Level Review Committee (DLRC), a district level forum under
the aegis of Lead Bank Scheme, primarily aims at facilitating stakeholders to
undertake review of the district level credit plans and to devise workable solutions for
enhancing flow of credit to deserving sectors, besides serving as a platform for Public
Representatives to share their valuable feedback for improvising strategy.
Objectives: DLRC forum shall function with the objective of evaluating the progress
made in the implementation of Schemes included in District Credit Plan/ Annual Action
Plan, identifying problem areas and devising suitable remedial steps. The forum shall
act as a platform for public representatives to share their views and opinions on credit
needs of the districts and issues and concerns relating to banking services etc. While
the objective of the DCC is to serve as a coordination and implementation forum, the
DLRC is expected to serve as a review forum.
Composition: The DLRC forum shall be chaired by the District Collector/ District
Magistrate and attended by all members of the District Consultative Committee (DCC).
Public representatives (MPs/ MLAs/ Zilla Panchayat Chiefs) shall invariably invited to
DLRC meetings. The forum may also have representatives of State Minority
Commission, SC/ ST Corporation and representatives of the group of beneficiaries of
rural lending. The forum may also consider inviting people with the expertise in the
fields, such as progressive farmers and local industrialists as special invitees.
The office of the Lead District Manager (LDM) shall be responsible for convening the
meetings of DRLCs and for providing secretarial support for smooth functioning of the
forum.
Frequency of the meetings: DLRC meetings may be held on a quarterly basis, as
hitherto.
Indicative agenda: The primary aim of the DLRC forum shall be to review the
performance under the aggregated district credit plan on a regular basis. The forum
shall also undertake review of lending to priority sectors, Government Sponsored
Schemes, performance of banks under various micro insurance and investment
schemes launched by the Govt. of India.
As the DLRC forum has public representatives as members who are well versed with
the ground realities, their views and opinions on the credit needs of the district may be
obtained and the same may be considered during the preparation of Potential Linked

Plan (PLP) by NABARD. Responses to queries from public representatives need to
be accorded highest priority and attended to promptly.
General instructions:
• Since public representative are the most important constituents of the DLRC forum,
Lead banks must fix dates of DLRC meetings taking into account the convenience
of the MPs and circulate the agenda papers to MPs well in advance.
• Lead banks should invariably invite MPs and other public representatives in
functions conducted by banks in the districts such as opening of new branches,
distribution of KCCs, SHG credit linkage programmes etc.
• Deliberations in the DLRC forum may be held as per the indicative agenda. All
other issues such as review of FIP, issues related to IT enabled FI, monitoring of
FLCs and RSETIs, scaling up FL efforts, enhancing/augmenting farmers’ income ,
SHG/ SME financing etc. should be deliberated in DCC as per extant instructions.
• Lead Banks should prepare an Annual Schedule of DLRC meetings on Calendar
year basis for all districts in consultation with the Chairperson of the meetings, Lead
District Officer of the RBI and Public Representatives. This yearly Calendar should
be prepared in the beginning of each year and circulated to all members as
advance intimation for blocking future dates to attend the DLRC meetings and the
meetings should be conducted as per the calendar. While preparing the Calendar,
it should be ensured that DCC and DLRC meetings are not held simultaneously.
• As per extant instructions on LBS, a pre-PLP meeting is required to be convened
by LDM during June every year to be attended by banks, Government agencies,
etc., to obtain their views and concerns regarding credit potential (sector/ activity-
wise) and deliberate on major financial and socio-economic developments in the
district in the last one year and priorities to be set out for inclusion in the PLP. With
a view to gain valuable insights on credit needs of the districts from public
representatives who are well versed with the ground realities, DLRC for June
quarter may be held prior to the pre-PLP meeting.

Appendix I
List of Circulars/ /Guidelines/ Instructions
Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
FIDD.CO.LBS.No. January 3, Expanding and Deepening of the
1.
S1416/02.01.014/2022-23 2023 Digital Payments Ecosystem
Amalgamation of Public Sector Banks
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.22/0 March 30, – Assignment of SLBC/ UTLBC
2.
2.01.001/2019-20 2020 Convenorship and Lead Bank
responsibilities
Formation of new Union Territory of
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.20/0 March 26, The Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
3.
2.01.001/2019-20 2020 Daman and Diu – Assignment of
UTLBC Convenorship
Inclusion of Wholly Owned
FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1797 / February
4. Subsidiaries (WOS) of Foreign Banks
02.01.001 / 2019-20 27, 2020
under Lead Bank Scheme
FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1551 / January Expanding and Deepening of Digital
5.
02.01.001 / 2019-20 23, 2020 Payments Ecosystem
National Strategy for Financial
FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1488 / January
6. Inclusion (NSFI): 2019-2024 –
02.01.001 / 2019-20 13, 2020
Universal Access to Financial Services
Formation of new Union Territory of
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.16/0 December Jammu and Kashmir and Union
7.
2.01.001/2019-20 26, 2019 Territory of Ladakh – Assignment of
UTLBC Convenorship
Extension of Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
FIDD.CO.LBS. No.1036 / November
8. Scheme to Animal Husbandry Farmers
02.01.001 / 2019-20 20, 2019
and Fisheries
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.13/ October 7, Expanding and Deepening of Digital
9.
02.01.001/2019-20 2019 Payments Ecosystem
10. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.475 / August 27, Recommendations of the High-Level
02.01.001 / 2019-20 2019 Committee on Deepening of Digital
Payments – Constitution of a Sub-
Committee on Digital Payments
11. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. August 13, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
No.09/02.01.001/2019-20 2019 – Implementation
12. FIDD.CO,LBS. No.387 / August 07, Financing of projects under Agri-clinics
02.01.001 / 2019-20 2019 and Agri-business center scheme –
Review at meetings
13. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.21 / July 03, Revamp of Lead Bank Scheme –
02.01.001 / 2019-20 2019 Action Points for SLBC Convenor
Banks/ Lead Banks – Developing a
Standardized system for data flow and
its management by SLBC/ UTLBC
Convenor Banks on SLBC/ UTLBC
websites

Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
14. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.2595 / June 24, Aligning roadmap for unbanked
02.01.001 / 2018-19 2019 villages having population more than
5000 with revised guidelines on Branch
Authorization Policy – Regional Rural
Banks
15. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.2431 / May 28, Payments Banks – Participation under
02.01.001 / 2018-19 2019 Lead Bank Scheme
16. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. No.16 / March 25, Assignment of SLBC/UTLBC
02.01.001 / 2018-19 2019 Convenorship – State of Gujarat and
Union Territories of Daman & Diu and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
17. FIDD.CO.LBS. June 05, Roadmap for opening banking outlets
No.3712/02.01.001/2017- 2018 in villages with population more than
18 5000 without a bank branch of a
scheduled commercial bank
18. FIDD.CO.LBS. May 30, Lead Bank Scheme – Strengthening of
No.3671/02.01.001/2017- 2018 Monitoring Information System (MIS)
19. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. April 06, Action Points for Lead Banks on
No.20/02.01.001/2017-18 2018 Enhancing the Effectiveness of Lead
District Managers (LDMs)
20. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.19/0 April 06, Revamp of Lead Bank Scheme - Action
2.01.001/2017-18 2018 Points for SLBC Convenor Banks/
Lead Banks
21. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.3017 / April 02, Small Finance Banks – Participation
02.01.001 / 2017-18 2018 under Lead Bank Scheme
22. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. June 08, Circular on Aligning roadmap for
No.31/02.01.001/2016-17 2017 unbanked villages with population
more than 5000 with revised
Guidelines on Branch Authorisation
Policy.
23. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. September Doubling of Farmers’ Income by 2022 -
No.16/02.01.001/2016-17 29, 2016 Measures
24. FIDD.CO.LBS. No.5673/ May 20, Lead Bank Scheme- strengthening of
02.01.001/2015-16 2016 Monitoring Information System (MIS)
25. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. No.17/ January Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
02.01.001/2015-16 14, 2016 – Seeding of Aadhaar in Bank
Accounts- Clarification
26. FIDD.CO.LBS.BC. December Roadmap for opening brick and mortar
No.82/02.01.001/2015-16 31, 2015 branches in villages with population
more than 5000 without a bank branch
of a scheduled commercial bank
27. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No. March 14, Annual Credit Plans – Potential Linked
93 /02.01.001/2013-14 2014 Plan (PLPs) prepared by NABARD
28. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No. July 09, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
11 /02.01.001/2013-14 2013 – Implementation - Guidelines
29. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.12/ July 11, Assignment of Lead Bank
02.08.001/2013-14 2013 Responsibility in districts of
Metropolitan Areas

Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
30. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No. May 10, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme
75 /02.01.001/2012-13 2013 – Implementation
31. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No. March 19, Lead Bank Scheme – Strengthening of
68 /02.01.001/2012-13 2013 Monitoring Information System
32. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. June 19, Roadmap-Provision of banking
No.86/02.01.001/2011-12 2012 services in villages with population
below 2000
33. RPCD. CO. LBS. B.C. No. March 29, SLBC Website - Standardization of
68/02.01.001/2011-12 2012 information / data
34. RPCD. CO. LBS. B.C. No. March 20, Lead Bank Scheme - District
67/02.01.001/2011-2012 2012 Consultative Committee (DCC) -
Inclusion of Director of MSME-DI
35. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. February Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
No.60 /02.08.001/2011-12 17, 2012 public representatives like MP/MLA/
ZP Chiefs in District Level Review
Committee (DLRC) meetings
36. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.No.74 May 30, Resolution of issues regarding
/02.19.010/2010-11 2011 allocation of villages under Electronic
Benefit Transfer (EBT) scheme and
roadmap for providing banking
services in villages with population
above 2000 under Financial Inclusion
Plan (FIP)
37. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. No.44 December Lead Bank Scheme – Conduct of State
/02.19.10/2010-11 29, 2010 Level Bankers' Committee
(SLBC)/Union Territory Level Bankers'
Committee (UTLBC) meetings
38. RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC. September High Level Committee to Review Lead
No. 21/02.19.10/2010-11 16, 2010 Bank scheme- Providing banking
services in every village having
population of over 2000
39. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC. No.15 July 26, Lead Bank Scheme - Revitalising
/02.19.10/2010-11 2010 SLBC Meetings
40. RPCD.CO.LBS.BC.57/ March 02, Report of the High Level Committee to
02.19.10/2009-2010 2010 Review Lead Bank Scheme -
Implementation of the
Recommendations - Lead banks and
SCBs
41. RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.N February Report of the High Level Committee to
o.56 /02.19.10/2009-10 26, 2010 Review Lead Bank Scheme -
Implementation of the
Recommendations - SLBC Convenor
banks
42. RPCD. CO. LBS. HLC.BC. November High Level Committee to review LBS-
No. 43/02.19.10/2009-10 27, 2009 Providing banking services in every
village having population of over 2000
by March 2011
43. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC. June 02, Sub-Committee of SLBC for Export
No.111/02.13.03/2008-09 2009 Promotion

Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
44. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC. No.79/ December Inclusion of issues pertaining to MSME
02.01.01/2008-2009 30, 2008 Sector in SLBC meeting
45. RPCD.LBS.CO.No. May 22, Credit Deposit Ratio – Implementation
10911/02.02.01/ 2006-07 2007 of the recommendations of Expert
Group on CD Ratio - Clarifications
46. RPCD.LBS.CO.BC. No.33 November Lead Bank Scheme - Inclusion of
/02.18.02/2006-07 15, 2006 National Horticulture Board as a
permanent member of SLBC of the
respective State
47. RPCD. LBS. BC. No.20 August 30, Financial Inclusion by extension of
/02.01.01/2006-07 2006 banking services with 'No Frills'
accounts and issue of GCC
48. RPCD. LBS. BC. No.52 December Financing of projects under Agri clinics
/02.02.001/2005-06 06, 2005 & Agri Business Centres Scheme –
Review at meetings
49. RPCD. No. LBS. BC. 50 December Participation in various fora under Lead
/02.01.01/2005-06 06, 2005 Bank Scheme
50. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. November Credit Deposit Ratio - Implementation
No.47 /02.01.001/2005-06 09, 2005 of recommendations of expert group
on CD Ratio
51. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. July 06, Participation of MPs/Public
No.11 /02.01.001/2005-06 2005 Representatives in DLRC meetings -
Functions relating to Self Help Groups
(SHGs) Credit Linkage Programme
52. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. April 11, Rural lending - ACPs based on the
No.93 /02.01.001/2004-05 2005 Potential Linked Plans (PLPs)
prepared by NABARD
53. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. January Participation of private sector banks
No.76 /02.01.001/2004-05 28, 2005 under various fora under Lead Bank
Scheme
54. RPCD.LBS(SAA).BC. December Relaxation in Service Area Norms
No.62 /08.01.00/2004-05 08, 2004
55. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. No.5 July 16, Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
/02.01.001/2004-05 2004 Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives in District Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
56. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. December Credit Flow to Boost Economic Growth
No.56 /02.01.001/2003-04 20, 2003
57. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. July 29, Convening DLRC meetings - Late
No.14 /02.01.001/2003-04 2003 submission of reports by lead banks
58. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. January Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
No.59 /02.01.001/2002-03 06, 2003 Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives in District Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
59. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. June 14, Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
No.106 /02.01.001/2001- 2002 Members of Parliament and Public

Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
Representatives in District Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
60. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. May 09, Lead Bank Scheme - Participation of
No.85 /02.01.001/2000-01 2001 Members of Parliament and Public
Representatives in District Level
Review Committee (DLRC) meetings
61. RPCD. CO.LBS. BC. April 27, Lead Bank Scheme - Convening of
No.81 /02.01.001/2000-01 2001 DLRC Meetings on Quarterly Basis -
Monitoring thereof
62. RPCD.LBS.BC.32/02.01.0 November Lead Bank Scheme - Holding of District
1/2000-01 03, 2000 Level Review Committee Meeting
63. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.86/02.0 December Inclusion of National Commission for
1.01/1996-97 16, 1996 Scheduled Castes/Tribes in State
Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)
64. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.13/02.0 July 19, Inclusion of Representatives of Khadi
1.01/1996-97 1996 and Village Industries
Commission/Boards in SLBC/DCC
65. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.118/02. February Credit Deposit Ratio of Banks in Rural
01.01/94-95 February 18, 18, 1995 and Semi-urban Areas
66. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.112/LB April 28, State Level Bankers' Committee -
C.34/88-89 1989 Meetings
67. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.12/65/8 August 11, Service Area Approach - Constitution
8-89 1988 of Block Level Bankers' Committees
68. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.100/5 April 22, Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit
5-87/88 1988 Plan - Annual Action Plan
69. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.87/65- March 14, Rural Lending - Service Area of Bank
87/88 1988 Branches
70. RPCD.No.LBS.BC.69/LB December Review of the Annual Action Plans by
S.34-87/88 14, 1987 State Level Bankers Committees
(SLBCs)
71. RPCD.No.LBS.524/55- April 28, Lead Bank Scheme - Preparation of
86/87 1987 District Credit Plans/Annual Action
Plans
72. RPCD.No.LBS.430/55/86 March 03, Lead Bank Scheme - District Credit
-87 1987 Plans - Guidelines for Fourth Round
73. RPCD.No.LBC.363/1-84 November Integration of Annual Action Plans
02, 1984 (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets
of Bank Branches
74. RPCD.No.LBC.162/1-84 September Integration of Annual Action Plans
06, 1984 (AAPs) with the Performance Budgets
of Bank Branches

Sr.
Circular No. Date Subject
No.
75. RPCD.No.LBC.135/55-84 August 30, Lead Bank Scheme - Annual Action
1984 Plan for 1985 - Guidelines for
Formulation of
76. RPCD.No.LBC.96/1-84 January Lead Bank Scheme - Appointment of
18, 1984 Lead Bank Officer - District Co-
ordinators
77. RPCD.No.LBC.739/1-83 August 04, Recommendations of the Working
1983 Group to Review the Working of the
Lead Bank Scheme
78. RPCD.No.3096/C.517- April 13, Convenorship of the State Level
82/83 1983 Bankers' Committees
79. DBOD.No. BP.B. BC June 18, Credit Deposit Ratio of banks in Rural
74/C/462(E.9)-80 1980 and Semi-Urban Areas
80. DBOD.NO.TEP.20/C.517 February State Level Bankers’ Committee
-77 02, 1977
81. DBOD.No. BD.2955/ August 11, Lead Bank Scheme
C.168-70 1970
82. DBOD.No. BD4327/ December Branch Expansion Programme-
C.168-169 23, 1969 Allocation of Districts under the Lead
Bank Scheme

Appendix II
Other References of Directions / Circulars Relevant to Lead Bank Scheme
Sr.
Reference No Date Subject
No.
1 FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.0 July 20, Master Circular – Deendayal
9/09.01.01/2022-23 2022 Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural
Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM)
[Public Sector Banks, Private Sector
Banks (including Small Finance
Banks)]
2 FIDD.CO.Plan.BC.5/04.0 September Master Directions - Priority Sector
9.01/2020-21 04, 2020 Lending (PSL) – Targets and
(updated Classification [All Commercial Banks
as on including Regional Rural Banks, Small
October Finance Banks, Local Area Banks and
20, 2022) Primary (Urban) Co-operative Banks
other than Salary Earners’ Banks]
3 FIDD.CO.FID.BC.No.1/12 April 01, Master Circular on SHG-Bank Linkage
.01.033/2022-23 2022 Programme [All SCBs]
4 FIDD.GSSD.BC.No.11/09 August 02, Master Circular on Credit Facilities to
.10.001/2022-23 2022 Minority Communities [All SCBs
(excluding RRBs and Foreign banks
with less than 20 branches)]
5 FIDD.CO.GSSD.BC.No.1 August 01, Master Circular - Credit Facilities to
0/09.09.001/2022-23 2022 Scheduled Castes (SCs) & Scheduled
Tribes (STs) [All SCBs (including
Small Finance Banks)]
6 FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.0 April 05, Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -
3/09.16.03/2021-22 2021 National Urban Livelihoods Mission
(DAY-NULM) [All SCBs & SFBs]
7 DBR.RRB.BL.BC. No.40 / May 31, Rationalisation of Branch
31.01.002 / 2018-19 2019 Authorisation Policy – Revision of
Guidelines (RRBs)
8 FIDD.CO.FSD.BC October Master Direction – Reserve Bank of
No.9/05.10.001/2018-19 17, 2018 India (Relief Measures by Banks in
Areas affected by Natural Calamities)
Directions 2018 – SCBs (including
SFBs and excluding RRBs)
9 FIDD.CO.FSD.BC. October Master Direction – Reserve Bank of
No.10/05.10.001/2018-19 17, 2018 India (Relief Measures by Banks in
Areas affected by Natural Calamities)
Directions 2018 – RRBs

Sr.
Reference No Date Subject
No.
10 FIDD.MSME & NFS. July 24, Master Direction - Lending to Micro,
12/06.02.31/2017-18 2017 Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)
(updated Sector [all SCBs (excluding RRBs)]
as on July
29, 2022)
11 FIDD. FLC. BC. No. July 13, Financial Literacy by FLCs (Financial
11/12.01.018/2017-18 2017 Literacy Centres) and rural branches -
Revision in funding limits, Audio-visual
content and provision of hand held
projectors [Scheduled Commercial
Banks (Including RRBs & Small
Finance Banks)]
12 FIDD.CO.SFB.No.9/04.0 July 06, Small Finance Banks – Compendium
9.001/ 2017-18 2017 of Guidelines on Financial Inclusion
and Development.
13 DBR.No. May 18, Rationalisation of Branch
BAPD.BC.69/22.01.001/2 2017 Authorisation Policy- Revision of
016-17 Guidelines [All Domestic SCBs
(excluding RRBs), SFBs Payments
Banks and LABs]