Foreword
“The future depends on what we do in the present.”
Mahatma Gandhi
Utkarsh, meaning "excellence" in Sanskrit, embodies the very essence and ethos of the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI, Bank). Excellence, of course, is not a destination but a
continuous journey. Utkarsh has been the guiding light of RBI since July 2019, be it
while navigating the turbulence of the pandemic under Utkarsh 2022 or reimagining the
financial sector for a post-pandemic world under Utkarsh 2.0.
Utkarsh 2029 is the strategy framework of RBI for the years 2026 to 2029 and has been
designed to transform the institutional purpose into actionable excellence. Grounded in
the Bank’s enduring values with a clear vision statement, Utkarsh 2029 is strengthened
by six strategy pillars encapsulating forty-nine overarching, purposeful and impactful
deliverables, formulated to align with the various functions of the Bank.
In an era marked by rapid technological advancements, evolving geopolitical dynamics,
and emerging climate-related imperatives, Utkarsh 2029 focuses
on areas, inter-alia, simplifying regulations, adopting a customer-centric approach,
deepening financial markets, upgrading technology and upskilling the staff. It also
endeavours to expand and globalise the reach of payment systems, strengthen the
financial ecosystem, establish robust metrics to benchmark the services offered by RBI,
and thereby position RBI as a world-class full-service central bank.
Utkarsh 2029 is not merely a medium-term strategy framework but a shared compass
to RBI’s resolve to traverse complexity with foresight and serve the nation with
unwavering dedication. It reinforces the collective aspiration to contribute meaningfully
to India’s journey towards becoming a developed nation, a Viksit Bharat. Jai Hind !
Sanjay Malhotra
Governor
March 30, 2026

Executive Summary
The Reserve Bank of India had first formulated its medium-term strategy framework,
viz. ‘Utkarsh 2022’ in July 2019, replacing its annual action plans as the latter spanned
over a short period, insufficient to pursue strategic objectives. Utkarsh 2022 articulated
a mission statement, six vision statements, 24 strategies, 153 goals, and 352 milestones
to be achieved by December 2022. The subsequent strategy framework, i.e., ‘Utkarsh
2.0’, spanned the period 2023-25. It harnessed the strengths of Utkarsh 2022 by
retaining the six vision statements as well as its core purpose, values, and mission.
Utkarsh 2.0 aimed at pursuing 170 milestones.
Continuing the previous two frameworks, Utkarsh 2029 communicates the medium-term
strategic priorities of RBI, over a three-year time horizon, Financial Year (FY) 2026-29.
It is a well-thought-out mix of the top-down and bottom-up approaches, merging the
forward-looking vision of RBI with the deliverables put forward to achieve the vision.
While the regular functions of RBI will continue, the overarching and impactful
deliverables that are brought under the ambit of Utkarsh 2029 aim to align the functions
with objectives to manage risks, adapt to new technologies, enhance accountability to
stakeholders, and expand internationalisation initiatives, thereby making it a future-
ready organisation.
Utkarsh 2029 framework has strategy pillars and deliverables, guided by the vision and
values of RBI, as well as the broader vision of making India Viksit Bharat. The six
strategy pillars highlight the priorities, each pillar encompassing overarching,
purposeful, forward-looking and transformative deliverables, which also address the
interconnectedness between various functions of the Bank towards collaborative
achievement of slated deliverables. These deliverables would be monitored digitally
through the Utkarsh web application, with quarterly reporting of the status of
achievement to the top management. Periodic monitoring mechanism offers flexibility to
adapt to the dynamic scenario, as this strategy framework is alive to the emerging
requirements of the financial ecosystem. This strategy framework is also being aligned
with the FY of RBI to synergise resource allocation under activity-based budgeting,
thereby making it a coherent framework.

I. Utkarsh 2029 – Medium-Term Strategy Framework for 2026-29
Introduction
I.1 Utkarsh 2029 articulates the strategic priorities of RBI to solidify its position as a
world-class full-service central bank. As a strategy framework, it focuses on overarching
and impactful deliverables, while regular ongoing activities would continue to be
performed outside this framework. Spanning three years from April 2026 to March 2029,
Utkarsh 2029 also lays down the foundation to achieve certain long-term deliverables
such as pursuing Project Sa-Mudra for modernising the currency management system,
expanding CBDC for supporting cross-border payments efficient, scaling up ULI for
inclusive credit delivery, developing frameworks for use of emerging technologies such
as AI and Quantum in our financial sector, and so on. At the same time, Utkarsh 2029
continues the long-term deliverables for which the foundation was laid under Utkarsh
2.0, such as internationalisation of the INR as well as the UPI to revolutionise cross-
border payments, etc. Utkarsh 2029 aligns itself with the FY of RBI from April to March,
thus synergising allocation and utilisation of resources through activity-based budgeting.
Structure
I.2 Utkarsh 2029 has been fine-tuned to a three-layered structure consisting of
strategy pillars, each pillar encompassing a set of deliverables, guided by the vision and
values of RBI (Chart I.1):
Chart I.1: Structure of Utkarsh 2029
Vision
Strategy Pillars Values
Deliverables

Vision and Values
I.3 The Vision statement of Utkarsh 2029 refines the mission, vision and core
purpose of the earlier Utkarsh editions:
‘Continue excellence while enabling a stable, inclusive and technologically robust
financial system.’
I.4 Utkarsh 2029 pursues the values of Utkarsh 2022 and Utkarsh 2.0 to guide the
actions of RBI:
Table I.1: Values and Actions of RBI
Values Actions
Public Interest Ensure public interest by following customer centric
approach
Integrity and Maintain highest standards of integrity and independence
Independence and foster trust by sustaining transparency and
accountability
Responsiveness and Be agile and responsive to changing technological
Innovation requirements of the financial ecosystem
Diversity and Promote diversity and inclusion in all its activities
Inclusiveness
Introspection and Pursuit Pursue professional excellence and stay committed to
of Excellence continuous self-appraisal
Strategy Pillars and Deliverables
I.5 To deliver the values, emphasis will be given to technology-driven initiatives,
simplifying instructions, bringing clarity in communication, reducing compliance costs,
and maintaining stakeholder centricity. Utkarsh 2029 also incorporates high-impact
projects, though the achievement of timelines may extend beyond three years, since
work towards laying a strong foundation will be undertaken during this period. This is
articulated through the strategy pillars, which highlight the strategic priorities and the
deliverables they encompass, which are the actionable items for the Bank.

I.6 To foster internal inclusivity, inputs from all the CODs, ROs, and Subsidiaries of
RBI, as applicable, have been incorporated in shaping the deliverables. Interlinkages,
interdependencies and support required from internal / external stakeholders have been
factored in while establishing the timelines. Guidance has also been taken from the
Aspirational Goals for RBI@100 and the goals shared with the Government of India
under Viksit Bharat 2047 and Panch Pran. Forty-nine deliverables under six strategy
pillars encapsulate the Utkarsh 2029 framework, with each strategy pillar highlighting a
distinct and important priority of RBI.
The strategy pillars of Utkarsh 2029 and its focus areas are:
Table I.2: Strategy Pillars
Strategy Statement Focus Areas
Pillar
1 Robust Regulations Simplification, Resilience
2 Customer Centricity and Inclusive Accessibility, Interconnectedness
Finance
3 Competitive Markets Financial Deepening, Digitisation
4 Effective Technology Innovation, Cybersecurity
5 Future-ready Organisation Upskilling, Sustainability
6 Global India Standardisation, Internationalisation
I.7 Robust Regulations – RBI endeavours to review, rationalise, and simplify
instructions periodically to align its regulations / master directions / master circulars with
evolving economic dynamics and reduce compliance burden for REs, thereby promoting
ease of doing business. The Bank aims to minimise procedural redundancies, empower
REs with greater operational flexibility, encourage responsible innovation in present and
emerging realms of the financial system.
I.8 Customer Centricity and Inclusive Finance – RBI plays a multifaceted role in
ensuring last-mile accessibility and inclusion within the financial system. The Bank has
outlined to assess customer service in SCBs and to cover grievance escalation across
all REs to accelerate grievance redressal and empower customers. By scaling up ULI,
the Bank endeavours to enhance access to the financial system, reduce lending costs,

and promote inclusive credit delivery. Underscoring the interconnectedness in the
financial system, the Bank intends to review and enhance the system-wide contagion
risk assessment. By reviewing the delivery of services under the Citizen’s Charter and
publishing a periodic metrics on the same, RBI affirms its commitment to continuous
self-appraisal and public service.
I.9 Competitive Markets – This strategy pillar aims to enhance the competitiveness of
markets under its ambit and bolster market infrastructure by automating processes,
increasing central clearing for improved operational efficiency, reducing risk, and
enhancing market access. This pillar focuses on deliverables that aim at reducing
turnaround time of auctions, strengthening pricing transparency in the G-Secs market,
and enhancing retail access to markets.
I.10 Effective Technology – The Bank shall leverage technology in various areas of its
operations such as making the interface with REs and citizens electronic and eliminate
paper and / or email-based interactions. Furthermore, all internal processes shall be
end-to-end digitalised. Work in this regard has already gained momentum with the
initiation of projects related to foreign exchange management and customer grievance
redressal. Currency management module is being augmented to digitalise manual
processes and physical registers. Similar such initiatives will be taken to digitalise all
workflows and processes of the Bank. Moreover, initiatives such as deploying
technology-led supervisory tools, developing an indigenous AI tool based on a purpose-
built LLM, augmenting critical applications like e-Kuber 3.0, and incorporating the latest
technology in currency infrastructure and banknotes will be maintained. Through cyber-
risk capacity building, issuing a framework on the use of AI in the financial sector,
expanding asset tokenisation and setting up Digital and AI sandboxes, the Bank aims
to promote responsible innovation and mindful use of technology in the financial sector.
At the same time, the digitisation of internal work processes of the Bank strengthens the
document management system and creates a centralised institutional memory, thereby
promoting efficiency.
I.11 Future-ready Organisation – Being a full-service central bank, the Bank operates
in a multidimensional environment, which underscores the need to build a future-ready
organisation through continuous upskilling of resources, reviewing functions across its
offices, strengthening two-way communication with its stakeholders, and embedding

sustainability and climate awareness in its actions and decisions to further institutional
excellence.
I.12 Global India – The Bank endeavours to foster greater cooperation with the rest of
the world by promoting the implementation of the UPI stack in other countries to
modernise the payment infrastructure, augmenting international trade settlement in INR,
expanding cross-border CBDC arrangements, and adopting global standards to
enhance global competitiveness. Concomitantly, it aims to actively pursue the
leadership role India could play in different international discourses.
I.13 Under Utkarsh 2029, ROs will serve as critical conduits for executing the national
priorities at the ground level, ensuring that financial inclusion, supervision, and last-mile
service reflect regional realities. This approach ensures that RBI’s value of diversity and
inclusiveness is embedded in its strategic fabric.
I.14 Utkarsh 2029 arrives at a pivotal moment, as India leverages its G20 legacy, and
the present BRICS chairmanship, to champion multilateral and South-South financial
co-operation. This strategy framework is an integral part of the roadmap to further the
Indian Rupee’s global integration, extend UPI to other countries, and expand bilateral
and multilateral CBDC arrangements. Utkarsh 2029 is not just a strategy framework but
a reaffirmation of RBI’s zeal to serve the nation through steadfast adherence to its
values, unwavering focus on systemic resilience, and unrelenting commitment to public
service. The RBI will advance to achieve this roadmap through disciplined execution,
continuous introspection, user feedback and a focused dedication to outcomes that
benefit all its stakeholders.
********

Select Abbreviations
- Artificial Intelligence
AI
CBDC - Central Bank Digital Currency
CODs - Central Office Departments
FY - Financial Year
INR - Indian Rupee (₹)
LLM - Large Language Model
RBI - Reserve Bank of India
REs - Regulated Entities
ROs - Regional Offices
SCBs - Scheduled Commercial Banks
ULI - Unified Lending Interface
UPI - Unified Payments Interface